Copyright Act (R.S., 1985, c. C-42)

Definitions

**2. ** In this Act,

"architectural work"

"architectural work" means any building or structure or any model of a
building or structure;


"architectural work of art" [Repealed, 1993, c. 44, s. 53]

"artistic work"

"artistic work" includes paintings, drawings, maps, charts, plans,
photographs, engravings, sculptures, works of artistic craftsmanship,
architectural works, and compilations of artistic works;


"Berne Convention country"

"Berne Convention country" means a country that is a party to the Convention
for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works concluded at Berne on
September 9, 1886, or any one of its revisions, including the Paris Act of
1971;


"Board"

"Board" means the Copyright Board established by subsection 66(1);


"book"

"book" means a volume or a part or division of a volume, in printed form, but
does not include

(a) a pamphlet,

(b) a newspaper, review, magazine or other periodical,

(c) a map, chart, plan or sheet music where the map, chart, plan or sheet
music is separately published, and

(d) an instruction or repair manual that accompanies a product or that is
supplied as an accessory to a service;


"broadcaster"

"broadcaster" means a body that, in the course of operating a broadcasting
undertaking, broadcasts a communication signal in accordance with the law of
the country in which the broadcasting undertaking is carried on, but excludes
a body whose primary activity in relation to communication signals is their
retransmission;


"choreographic work"

"choreographic work" includes any work of choreography, whether or not it has
any story line;


"cinematograph" [Repealed, 1997, c. 24, s. 1]


"cinematographic work"

"cinematographic work" includes any work expressed by any process analogous to
cinematography, whether or not accompanied by a soundtrack;


"collective society"

"collective society" means a society, association or corporation that carries
on the business of collective administration of copyright or of the
remuneration right conferred by section 19 or 81 for the benefit of those who,
by assignment, grant of licence, appointment of it as their agent or
otherwise, authorize it to act on their behalf in relation to that collective
administration, and

(a) operates a licensing scheme, applicable in relation to a repertoire of
works, performer's performances, sound recordings or communication signals of
more than one author, performer, sound recording maker or broadcaster,
pursuant to which the society, association or corporation sets out classes of
uses that it agrees to authorize under this Act, and the royalties and terms
and conditions on which it agrees to authorize those classes of uses, or

(b) carries on the business of collecting and distributing royalties or levies
payable pursuant to this Act;


"collective work"

"collective work" means

(a) an encyclopaedia, dictionary, year book or similar work,

(b) a newspaper, review, magazine or similar periodical, and

(c) any work written in distinct parts by different authors, or in which works
or parts of works of different authors are incorporated;


"commercially available"

"commercially available" means, in relation to a work or other subject-matter,

(a) available on the Canadian market within a reasonable time and for a
reasonable price and may be located with reasonable effort, or

(b) for which a licence to reproduce, perform in public or communicate to the
public by telecommunication is available from a collective society within a
reasonable time and for a reasonable price and may be located with reasonable
effort;


"communication signal"

"communication signal" means radio waves transmitted through space without any
artificial guide, for reception by the public;


"compilation"

"compilation" means

(a) a work resulting from the selection or arrangement of literary, dramatic,
musical or artistic works or of parts thereof, or

(b) a work resulting from the selection or arrangement of data;


"computer program"

"computer program" means a set of instructions or statements, expressed,
fixed, embodied or stored in any manner, that is to be used directly or
indirectly in a computer in order to bring about a specific result;


"copyright"

"copyright" means the rights described in

(a) section 3, in the case of a work,

(b) sections 15 and 26, in the case of a performer's performance,

(c) section 18, in the case of a sound recording, or

(d) section 21, in the case of a communication signal;


"country"

"country" includes any territory;


"defendant"

"defendant" includes a respondent to an application;


"delivery" [Repealed, 1997, c. 24, s. 1]


"dramatic work"

"dramatic work" includes

(a) any piece for recitation, choreographic work or mime, the scenic
arrangement or acting form of which is fixed in writing or otherwise,

(b) any cinematographic work, and

(c) any compilation of dramatic works;


"educational institution"

"educational institution" means

(a) a non-profit institution licensed or recognized by or under an Act of
Parliament or the legislature of a province to provide pre-school, elementary,
secondary or post-secondary education,

(b) a non-profit institution that is directed or controlled by a board of
education regulated by or under an Act of the legislature of a province and
that provides continuing, professional or vocational education or training,

(c) a department or agency of any order of government, or any non-profit body,
that controls or supervises education or training referred to in paragraph (a)
or (b), or

(d) any other non-profit institution prescribed by regulation;


"engravings"

"engravings" includes etchings, lithographs, woodcuts, prints and other
similar works, not being photographs;


"every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work"

"every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work" includes every
original production in the literary, scientific or artistic domain, whatever
may be the mode or form of its expression, such as compilations, books,
pamphlets and other writings, lectures, dramatic or dramatico-musical works,
musical works, translations, illustrations, sketches and plastic works
relative to geography, topography, architecture or science;


"exclusive distributor"

"exclusive distributor" means, in relation to a book, a person who

(a) has, before or after the coming into force of this definition, been
appointed in writing, by the owner or exclusive licensee of the copyright in
the book in Canada, as

(i) the only distributor of the book in Canada or any part of Canada, or

(ii) the only distributor of the book in Canada or any part of Canada in
respect of a particular sector of the market, and

(b) meets the criteria established by regulations made under section 2.6,

and, for greater certainty, if there are no regulations made under section
2.6, then no person qualifies under this definition as an "exclusive
distributor";


"Her Majesty's Realms and Territories" [Repealed, 1997, c. 24, s. 1]


"infringing"

"infringing" means

(a) in relation to a work in which copyright subsists, any copy, including any
colourable imitation, made or dealt with in contravention of this Act,

(b) in relation to a performer's performance in respect of which copyright
subsists, any fixation or copy of a fixation of it made or dealt with in
contravention of this Act,

(c) in relation to a sound recording in respect of which copyright subsists,
any copy of it made or dealt with in contravention of this Act, or

(d) in relation to a communication signal in respect of which copyright
subsists, any fixation or copy of a fixation of it made or dealt with in
contravention of this Act.

The definition includes a copy that is imported in the circumstances set out
in paragraph 27(2)(e) and section 27.1 but does not otherwise include a copy
made with the consent of the owner of the copyright in the country where the
copy was made;


"lecture"

"lecture" includes address, speech and sermon;


"legal representatives"

"legal representatives" includes heirs, executors, administrators, successors
and assigns, or agents or attorneys who are thereunto duly authorized in
writing;


"library, archive or museum"

"library, archive or museum" means

(a) an institution, whether or not incorporated, that is not established or
conducted for profit or that does not form a part of, or is not administered
or directly or indirectly controlled by, a body that is established or
conducted for profit, in which is held and maintained a collection of
documents and other materials that is open to the public or to researchers, or

(b) any other non-profit institution prescribed by regulation;


"literary work"

"literary work" includes tables, computer programs, and compilations of
literary works;


"maker"

"maker" means

(a) in relation to a cinematographic work, the person by whom the arrangements
necessary for the making of the work are undertaken, or

(b) in relation to a sound recording, the person by whom the arrangements
necessary for the first fixation of the sounds are undertaken;


"Minister"

"Minister", except in section 44.1, means the Minister of Industry;


"moral rights"

"moral rights" means the rights described in subsections 14.1(1) and 17.1(1);


"musical work"

"musical work" means any work of music or musical composition, with or without
words, and includes any compilation thereof;


"perceptual disability"

"perceptual disability" means a disability that prevents or inhibits a person
from reading or hearing a literary, musical, dramatic or artistic work in its
original format, and includes such a disability resulting from

(a) severe or total impairment of sight or hearing or the inability to focus
or move one's eyes,

(b) the inability to hold or manipulate a book, or

(c) an impairment relating to comprehension;


"performance"

"performance" means any acoustic or visual representation of a work,
performer's performance, sound recording or communication signal, including a
representation made by means of any mechanical instrument, radio receiving set
or television receiving set;


"performer's performance"

"performer's performance" means any of the following when done by a performer:

(a) a performance of an artistic work, dramatic work or musical work, whether
or not the work was previously fixed in any material form, and whether or not
the work's term of copyright protection under this Act has expired,

(b) a recitation or reading of a literary work, whether or not the work's term
of copyright protection under this Act has expired, or

(c) an improvisation of a dramatic work, musical work or literary work,
whether or not the improvised work is based on a pre-existing work;


"photograph"

"photograph" includes photo-lithograph and any work expressed by any process
analogous to photography;


"plaintiff"

"plaintiff" includes an applicant;


"plate"

"plate" includes

(a) any stereotype or other plate, stone, block, mould, matrix, transfer or
negative used or intended to be used for printing or reproducing copies of any
work, and

(b) any matrix or other appliance used or intended to be used for making or
reproducing sound recordings, performer's performances or communication
signals;


"premises"

"premises" means, in relation to an educational institution, a place where
education or training referred to in the definition "educational institution"
is provided, controlled or supervised by the educational institution;


"receiving device" [Repealed, 1993, c. 44, s. 79]


"Rome Convention country"

"Rome Convention country" means a country that is a party to the International
Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and
Broadcasting Organisations, done at Rome on October 26, 1961;


"sculpture"

"sculpture" includes a cast or model;


"sound recording"

"sound recording" means a recording, fixed in any material form, consisting of
sounds, whether or not of a performance of a work, but excludes any soundtrack
of a cinematographic work where it accompanies the cinematographic work;


"telecommunication"

"telecommunication" means any transmission of signs, signals, writing, images
or sounds or intelligence of any nature by wire, radio, visual, optical or
other electromagnetic system;


"treaty country"

"treaty country" means a Berne Convention country, UCC country, WCT country
or WTO Member;


"UCC country"

"UCC country" means a country that is a party to the Universal Copyright
Convention, adopted on September 6, 1952 in Geneva, Switzerland, or to that
Convention as revised in Paris, France on July 24, 1971;


"WCT country"

"WCT country" means a country that is a party to the WIPO Copyright Treaty,
adopted in Geneva on December 20, 1996;


"work"

"work" includes the title thereof when such title is original and distinctive;


"work of joint authorship"

"work of joint authorship" means a work produced by the collaboration of two
or more authors in which the contribution of one author is not distinct from
the contribution of the other author or authors;


"work of sculpture" [Repealed, 1997, c. 24, s. 1]


"WPPT country"

"WPPT country" means a country that is a party to the WIPO Performances and
Phonograms Treaty, adopted in Geneva on December 20, 1996;


"WTO Member"

"WTO Member" means a Member of the World Trade Organization as defined in
subsection 2(1) of the _World Trade Organization Agreement Implementation
Act_.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 2; R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 1; 1988, c. 65,
s. 61; 1992, c. 1, s. 145(F); 1993, c. 23, s. 1, c. 44, ss. 53, 79; 1994, c.
47, s. 56; 1995, c. 1, s. 62; 1997, c. 24, s. 1.

Compilations

**2.1 ** (1) A compilation containing two or more of the categories of
literary, dramatic, musical or artistic works shall be deemed to be a
compilation of the category making up the most substantial part of the
compilation.

Idem

(2) The mere fact that a work is included in a compilation does not increase,
decrease or otherwise affect the protection conferred by this Act in respect
of the copyright in the work or the moral rights in respect of the work.

1993, c. 44, s. 54.

Definition of "maker"

**2.11 ** For greater certainty, the arrangements referred to in paragraph (b)
of the definition "maker" in section 2, as that term is used in section 19 and
in the definition "eligible maker" in section 79, include arrangements for
entering into contracts with performers, financial arrangements and technical
arrangements required for the first fixation of the sounds for a sound
recording.

1997, c. 24, s. 2.

Definition of "publication"

**2.2 ** (1) For the purposes of this Act, "publication" means

(a) in relation to works,

(i) making copies of a work available to the public,

(ii) the construction of an architectural work, and

(iii) the incorporation of an artistic work into an architectural work, and

(b) in relation to sound recordings, making copies of a sound recording
available to the public,

but does not include

(c) the performance in public, or the communication to the public by
telecommunication, of a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work or a
sound recording, or

(d) the exhibition in public of an artistic work.

Issue of photographs and engravings

(2) For the purpose of subsection (1), the issue of photographs and engravings
of sculptures and architectural works is not deemed to be publication of those
works.

Where no consent of copyright owner

(3) For the purposes of this Act, other than in respect of infringement of
copyright, a work or other subject-matter is not deemed to be published or
performed in public or communicated to the public by telecommunication if that
act is done without the consent of the owner of the copyright.

Unpublished works

(4) Where, in the case of an unpublished work, the making of the work is
extended over a considerable period, the conditions of this Act conferring
copyright are deemed to have been complied with if the author was, during any
substantial part of that period, a subject or citizen of, or a person
ordinarily resident in, a country to which this Act extends.

1997, c. 24, s. 2.

Telecommunication

**2.3 ** A person who communicates a work or other subject-matter to the
public by telecommunication does not by that act alone perform it in public,
nor by that act alone is deemed to authorize its performance in public.

1997, c. 24, s. 2.

Communication to the public by telecommunication

**2.4 ** (1) For the purposes of communication to the public by
telecommunication,

(a) persons who occupy apartments, hotel rooms or dwelling units situated in
the same building are part of the public, and a communication intended to be
received exclusively by such persons is a communication to the public;

(b) a person whose only act in respect of the communication of a work or other
subject-matter to the public consists of providing the means of
telecommunication necessary for another person to so communicate the work or
other subject-matter does not communicate that work or other subject-matter to
the public; and

(c) where a person, as part of

(i) a network, within the meaning of the _Broadcasting Act_, whose operations
result in the communication of works or other subject-matter to the public, or

(ii) any programming undertaking whose operations result in the communication
of works or other subject-matter to the public,

transmits by telecommunication a work or other subject-matter that is
communicated to the public by another person who is not a retransmitter of a
signal within the meaning of subsection 31(1), the transmission and
communication of that work or other subject-matter by those persons constitute
a single communication to the public for which those persons are jointly and
severally liable.

Regulations

(2) The Governor in Council may make regulations defining "programming
undertaking" for the purpose of paragraph (1)(c).

Exception

(3) A work is not communicated in the manner described in paragraph (1)(c) or
3(1)(f) where a signal carrying the work is retransmitted to a person who is a
retransmitter within the meaning of subsection 31(1).

(1.1) For the purposes of this Act, communication of a work or other
subject-matter to the public by telecommunication includes making it available
to the public by telecommunication in a way that allows a member of the public
to have access to it from a place and at a time individually chosen by that
member of the public.

1997, c. 24, s. 2; 2002, c. 26, s. 1.

What constitutes rental

**2.5 ** (1) For the purposes of paragraphs 3(1)(h) and (i), 15(1)(c) and
18(1)(c), an arrangement, whatever its form, constitutes a rental of a
computer program or sound recording if, and only if,

(a) it is in substance a rental, having regard to all the circumstances; and

(b) it is entered into with motive of gain in relation to the overall
operations of the person who rents out the computer program or sound
recording, as the case may be.

Motive of gain

(2) For the purpose of paragraph (1)(b), a person who rents out a computer
program or sound recording with the intention of recovering no more than the
costs, including overhead, associated with the rental operations does not by
that act alone have a motive of gain in relation to the rental operations.

1997, c. 24, s. 2.

Exclusive distributor

**2.6 ** The Governor in Council may make regulations establishing
distribution criteria for the purpose of paragraph (b) of the definition
"exclusive distributor" in section 2.

1997, c. 24, s. 2.

Exclusive licence

**2.7 ** For the purposes of this Act, an exclusive licence is an
authorization to do any act that is subject to copyright to the exclusion of
all others including the copyright owner, whether the authorization is granted
by the owner or an exclusive licensee claiming under the owner.

1997, c. 24, s. 2.

# PART I

# COPYRIGHT AND MORAL RIGHTS IN WORKS

## Copyright

Copyright in works

**3. ** (1) For the purposes of this Act, "copyright", in relation to a work,
means the sole right to produce or reproduce the work or any substantial part
thereof in any material form whatever, to perform the work or any substantial
part thereof in public or, if the work is unpublished, to publish the work or
any substantial part thereof, and includes the sole right

(a) to produce, reproduce, perform or publish any translation of the work,

(b) in the case of a dramatic work, to convert it into a novel or other non-
dramatic work,

(c) in the case of a novel or other non-dramatic work, or of an artistic work,
to convert it into a dramatic work, by way of performance in public or
otherwise,

(d) in the case of a literary, dramatic or musical work, to make any sound
recording, cinematograph film or other contrivance by means of which the work
may be mechanically reproduced or performed,

(e) in the case of any literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, to
reproduce, adapt and publicly present the work as a cinematographic work,

(f) in the case of any literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work, to
communicate the work to the public by telecommunication,

(g) to present at a public exhibition, for a purpose other than sale or hire,
an artistic work created after June 7, 1988, other than a map, chart or plan,

(h) in the case of a computer program that can be reproduced in the ordinary
course of its use, other than by a reproduction during its execution in
conjunction with a machine, device or computer, to rent out the computer
program,

(i) in the case of a musical work, to rent out a sound recording in which the
work is embodied, and

(j) in the case of a work that is in the form of a tangible object, to sell or
otherwise transfer ownership of the tangible object, as long as that ownership
has never previously been transferred in or outside Canada with the
authorization of the copyright owner,

and to authorize any such acts.

Simultaneous fixing

(1.1) A work that is communicated in the manner described in paragraph (1)(f)
is fixed even if it is fixed simultaneously with its communication.

(1.2) to (4) [Repealed, 1997, c. 24, s. 3]

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 3; R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 2; 1988, c. 65,
s. 62; 1993, c. 23, s. 2, c. 44, s. 55; 1997, c. 24, s. 3.

**4. ** [Repealed, 1997, c. 24, s. 4]

## Works in which Copyright may Subsist

Conditions for subsistence of copyright

**5. ** (1) Subject to this Act, copyright shall subsist in Canada, for the
term hereinafter mentioned, in every original literary, dramatic, musical and
artistic work if any one of the following conditions is met:

(a) in the case of any work, whether published or unpublished, including a
cinematographic work, the author was, at the date of the making of the work, a
citizen or subject of, or a person ordinarily resident in, a treaty country;

(b) in the case of a cinematographic work, whether published or unpublished,
the maker, at the date of the making of the cinematographic work,

(i) if a corporation, had its headquarters in a treaty country, or

(ii) if a natural person, was a citizen or subject of, or a person ordinarily
resident in, a treaty country; or

(c) in the case of a published work, including a cinematographic work,

(i) in relation to subparagraph 2.2(1)(a)(i), the first publication in such a
quantity as to satisfy the reasonable demands of the public, having regard to
the nature of the work, occurred in a treaty country, or

(ii) in relation to subparagraph 2.2(1)(a)(ii) or (iii), the first publication
occurred in a treaty country.

Protection for older works

(1.01) For the purposes of subsection (1), a country that becomes a Berne
Convention country, a WCT country or a WTO Member after the date of the making
or publication of a work shall, as of becoming a Berne Convention country or
WTO Member, as the case may be, is deemed to have been a Berne Convention
country, a WCT country or WTO Member at that date of the making or publication
of the work, subject to subsection (1.02) and sections 33 to 33.2.

Limitation

(1.02) Subsection (1.01) does not confer copyright protection in Canada on a
work whose term of copyright protection in the country referred to in that
subsection had expired before that country became a Berne Convention country,
a WCT country or a WTO Member, as the case may be.

Application of subsections (1.01) and (1.02)

(1.03) Subsections (1.01) and (1.02) apply, and are deemed to have applied,
regardless of whether the country in question became a Berne Convention
country, a WCT country or a WTO Member before or after the coming into force
of those subsections.

First publication

(1.1) The first publication described in subparagraph (1)(c)(i) or (ii) is
deemed to have occurred in a treaty country notwithstanding that it in fact
occurred previously elsewhere, if the interval between those two publications
did not exceed thirty days.

Idem

(1.2) Copyright shall not subsist in Canada otherwise than as provided by
subsection (1), except in so far as the protection conferred by this Act is
extended as hereinafter provided to foreign countries to which this Act does
not extend.

Minister may extend copyright to other countries

(2) Where the Minister certifies by notice, published in the _Canada Gazette_,
that any country that is not a treaty country grants or has undertaken to
grant, either by treaty, convention, agreement or law, to citizens of Canada,
the benefit of copyright on substantially the same basis as to its own
citizens or copyright protection substantially equal to that conferred by this
Act, the country shall, for the purpose of the rights conferred by this Act,
be treated as if it were a country to which this Act extends, and the Minister
may give a certificate, notwithstanding that the remedies for enforcing the
rights, or the restrictions on the importation of copies of works, under the
law of such country, differ from those in this Act.

(2.1) [Repealed, 1994, c. 47, s. 57]

(3) to (6) [Repealed, 1997, c. 24, s. 5]

Reciprocity protection preserved

(7) For greater certainty, the protection to which a work is entitled by
virtue of a notice published under subsection (2), or under that subsection as
it read at any time before the coming into force of this subsection, is not
affected by reason only of the country in question becoming a treaty country.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 5; 1993, c. 15, s. 2, c. 44, s. 57; 1994, c. 47, s.
57; 1997, c. 24, s. 5; 2001, c. 34, s. 34.

## Term of Copyright

Term of copyright

**6. ** The term for which copyright shall subsist shall, except as otherwise
expressly provided by this Act, be the life of the author, the remainder of
the calendar year in which the author dies, and a period of fifty years
following the end of that calendar year.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 6; 1993, c. 44, s. 58.

Anonymous and pseudonymous works

**6.1 ** Except as provided in section 6.2, where the identity of the author
of a work is unknown, copyright in the work shall subsist for whichever of the
following terms ends earlier:

(a) a term consisting of the remainder of the calendar year of the first
publication of the work and a period of fifty years following the end of that
calendar year, and

(b) a term consisting of the remainder of the calendar year of the making of
the work and a period of seventy-five years following the end of that calendar
year,

but where, during that term, the author's identity becomes commonly known, the
term provided in section 6 applies.

1993, c. 44, s. 58.

Anonymous and pseudonymous works of joint authorship

**6.2 ** Where the identity of all the authors of a work of joint authorship
is unknown, copyright in the work shall subsist for whichever of the following
terms ends earlier:

(a) a term consisting of the remainder of the calendar year of the first
publication of the work and a period of fifty years following the end of that
calendar year, and

(b) a term consisting of the remainder of the calendar year of the making of
the work and a period of seventy-five years following the end of that calendar
year,

but where, during that term, the identity of one or more of the authors
becomes commonly known, copyright shall subsist for the life of whichever of
those authors dies last, the remainder of the calendar year in which that
author dies, and a period of fifty years following the end of that calendar
year.

1993, c. 44, s. 58.

Term of copyright in posthumous works

**7. ** (1) Subject to subsection (2), in the case of a literary, dramatic or
musical work, or an engraving, in which copyright subsists at the date of the
death of the author or, in the case of a work of joint authorship, at or
immediately before the date of the death of the author who dies last, but
which has not been published or, in the case of a lecture or a dramatic or
musical work, been performed in public or communicated to the public by
telecommunication, before that date, copyright shall subsist until
publication, or performance in public or communication to the public by
telecommunication, whichever may first happen, for the remainder of the
calendar year of the publication or of the performance in public or
communication to the public by telecommunication, as the case may be, and for
a period of fifty years following the end of that calendar year.

Application of subsection (1)

(2) Subsection (1) applies only where the work in question was published or
performed in public or communicated to the public by telecommunication, as the
case may be, before the coming into force of this section.

Transitional provision

(3) Where

(a) a work has not, at the coming into force of this section, been published
or performed in public or communicated to the public by telecommunication,

(b) subsection (1) would apply to that work if it had been published or
performed in public or communicated to the public by telecommunication before
the coming into force of this section, and

(c) the relevant death referred to in subsection (1) occurred during the
period of fifty years immediately before the coming into force of this
section,

copyright shall subsist in the work for the remainder of the calendar year in
which this section comes into force and for a period of fifty years following
the end of that calendar year, whether or not the work is published or
performed in public or communicated to the public by telecommunication after
the coming into force of this section.

Transitional provision

(4) Where

(a) a work has not, at the coming into force of this section, been published
or performed in public or communicated to the public by telecommunication,

(b) subsection (1) would apply to that work if it had been published or
performed in public or communicated to the public by telecommunication before
the coming into force of this section, and

(c) the relevant death referred to in subsection (1) occurred more than fifty
years before the coming into force of this section,

copyright shall subsist in the work for the remainder of the calendar year in
which this section comes into force and for a period of five years following
the end of that calendar year, whether or not the work is published or
performed in public or communicated to the public by telecommunication after
the coming into force of this section.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 7; 1993, c. 44, s. 58; 1997, c. 24, s. 6.

**8. ** [Repealed, 1993, c. 44, s. 59]

Cases of joint authorship

**9. ** (1) In the case of a work of joint authorship, except as provided in
section 6.2, copyright shall subsist during the life of the author who dies
last, for the remainder of the calendar year of that author's death, and for a
period of fifty years following the end of that calendar year, and references
in this Act to the period after the expiration of any specified number of
years from the end of the calendar year of the death of the author shall be
construed as references to the period after the expiration of the like number
of years from the end of the calendar year of the death of the author who dies
last.

Nationals of other countries

(2) Authors who are nationals of any country, other than a country that is a
party to the North American Free Trade Agreement, that grants a term of
protection shorter than that mentioned in subsection (1) are not entitled to
claim a longer term of protection in Canada.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 9; 1993, c. 44, s. 60.

**10. ** [Repealed, 2010, c. 32, s. 6]

**11. ** [Repealed, 1997, c. 24, s. 8]

Cinematographic works

**11.1 ** Except for cinematographic works in which the arrangement or acting
form or the combination of incidents represented give the work a dramatic
character, copyright in a cinematographic work or a compilation of
cinematographic works shall subsist

(a) for the remainder of the calendar year of the first publication of the
cinematographic work or of the compilation, and for a period of fifty years
following the end of that calendar year; or

(b) if the cinematographic work or compilation is not published before the
expiration of fifty years following the end of the calendar year of its
making, for the remainder of that calendar year and for a period of fifty
years following the end of that calendar year.

1993, c. 44, s. 60; 1997, c. 24, s. 9.

Where copyright belongs to Her Majesty

**12. ** Without prejudice to any rights or privileges of the Crown, where any
work is, or has been, prepared or published by or under the direction or
control of Her Majesty or any government department, the copyright in the work
shall, subject to any agreement with the author, belong to Her Majesty and in
that case shall continue for the remainder of the calendar year of the first
publication of the work and for a period of fifty years following the end of
that calendar year.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 12; 1993, c. 44, s. 60.

## Ownership of Copyright

Ownership of copyright

**13. ** (1) Subject to this Act, the author of a work shall be the first
owner of the copyright therein.

(2) [Repealed, 2010, c. 32, s. 7]

Work made in the course of employment

(3) Where the author of a work was in the employment of some other person
under a contract of service or apprenticeship and the work was made in the
course of his employment by that person, the person by whom the author was
employed shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be the first
owner of the copyright, but where the work is an article or other contribution
to a newspaper, magazine or similar periodical, there shall, in the absence of
any agreement to the contrary, be deemed to be reserved to the author a right
to restrain the publication of the work, otherwise than as part of a
newspaper, magazine or similar periodical.

Assignments and licences

(4) The owner of the copyright in any work may assign the right, either wholly
or partially, and either generally or subject to limitations relating to
territory, medium or sector of the market or other limitations relating to the
scope of the assignment, and either for the whole term of the copyright or for
any other part thereof, and may grant any interest in the right by licence,
but no assignment or grant is valid unless it is in writing signed by the
owner of the right in respect of which the assignment or grant is made, or by
the owner's duly authorized agent.

Ownership in case of partial assignment

(5) Where, under any partial assignment of copyright, the assignee becomes
entitled to any right comprised in copyright, the assignee, with respect to
the rights so assigned, and the assignor, with respect to the rights not
assigned, shall be treated for the purposes of this Act as the owner of the
copyright, and this Act has effect accordingly.

Assignment of right of action

(6) For greater certainty, it is deemed always to have been the law that a
right of action for infringement of copyright may be assigned in association
with the assignment of the copyright or the grant of an interest in the
copyright by licence.

Exclusive licence

(7) For greater certainty, it is deemed always to have been the law that a
grant of an exclusive licence in a copyright constitutes the grant of an
interest in the copyright by licence.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 13; 1997, c. 24, s. 10.

Limitation where author is first owner of copyright

**14. ** (1) Where the author of a work is the first owner of the copyright
therein, no assignment of the copyright and no grant of any interest therein,
made by him, otherwise than by will, after June 4, 1921, is operative to vest
in the assignee or grantee any rights with respect to the copyright in the
work beyond the expiration of twenty-five years from the death of the author,
and the reversionary interest in the copyright expectant on the termination of
that period shall, on the death of the author, notwithstanding any agreement
to the contrary, devolve on his legal representatives as part of the estate of
the author, and any agreement entered into by the author as to the disposition
of such reversionary interest is void.

Restriction

(2) Nothing in subsection (1) shall be construed as applying to the assignment
of the copyright in a collective work or a licence to publish a work or part
of a work as part of a collective work.

(3) [Repealed, 1997, c. 24, s. 11]

(4) [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 3]

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 14; R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 3; 1997, c. 24,
s. 11.

**14.01 ** [Repealed, 1997, c. 24, s. 12]

## Moral Rights

Moral rights

**14.1 ** (1) The author of a work has, subject to section 28.2, the right to
the integrity of the work and, in connection with an act mentioned in section
3, the right, where reasonable in the circumstances, to be associated with the
work as its author by name or under a pseudonym and the right to remain
anonymous.

No assignment of moral rights

(2) Moral rights may not be assigned but may be waived in whole or in part.

No waiver by assignment

(3) An assignment of copyright in a work does not by that act alone constitute
a waiver of any moral rights.

Effect of waiver

(4) Where a waiver of any moral right is made in favour of an owner or a
licensee of copyright, it may be invoked by any person authorized by the owner
or licensee to use the work, unless there is an indication to the contrary in
the waiver.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 4.

Term

**14.2 ** (1) Moral rights in respect of a work subsist for the same term as
the copyright in the work.

Succession

(2) The moral rights in respect of a work pass, on the death of its author, to

(a) the person to whom those rights are specifically bequeathed;

(b) where there is no specific bequest of those moral rights and the author
dies testate in respect of the copyright in the work, the person to whom that
copyright is bequeathed; or

(c) where there is no person described in paragraph (a) or (b), the person
entitled to any other property in respect of which the author dies intestate.

Subsequent succession

(3) Subsection (2) applies, with such modifications as the circumstances
require, on the death of any person who holds moral rights.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 4; 1997, c. 24, s. 13.

# PART II

# COPYRIGHT IN PERFORMERS' PERFORMANCES, SOUND RECORDINGS AND COMMUNICATION
SIGNALS AND MORAL RIGHTS IN PERFORMERS' PERFORMANCES

## Performers' Rights

Copyright

**15. ** (1) Subject to subsection (2), a performer has a copyright in the
performer's performance, consisting of the sole right to do the following in
relation to the performer's performance or any substantial part thereof:

(a) if it is not fixed,

(i) to communicate it to the public by telecommunication,

(ii) to perform it in public, where it is communicated to the public by
telecommunication otherwise than by communication signal, and

(iii) to fix it in any material form,

(b) if it is fixed,

(i) to reproduce any fixation that was made without the performer's
authorization,

(ii) where the performer authorized a fixation, to reproduce any reproduction
of that fixation, if the reproduction being reproduced was made for a purpose
other than that for which the performer's authorization was given, and

(iii) where a fixation was permitted under Part III or VIII, to reproduce any
reproduction of that fixation, if the reproduction being reproduced was made
for a purpose other than one permitted under Part III or VIII, and

(c) to rent out a sound recording of it,

and to authorize any such acts.

(1.1) Subject to subsections (2.1) and (2.2), a performer's copyright in the
performer's performance consists of the sole right to do the following acts
in relation to the performer's performance or any substantial part of it and
to authorize any of those acts:

(a) if it is not fixed,

(i) to communicate it to the public by telecommunication,

(ii) to perform it in public, if it is communicated to the public by
telecommunication otherwise than by communication signal, and

(iii) to fix it in any material form;

(b) if it is fixed in a sound recording, to reproduce that fixation;

(c) to rent out a sound recording of it;

(d) to make a sound recording of it available to the public by
telecommunication in a way that allows a member of the public to have access
to the sound recording from a place and at a time individually chosen by that
member of the public and to communicate the sound recording to the public by
telecommunication in that way; and

(e) if it is fixed in a sound recording that is in the form of a tangible
object, to sell or otherwise transfer ownership of the tangible object, as
long as that ownership has never previously been transferred in or outside
Canada with the authorization of the owner of the copyright in the
performer's performance.

Conditions

(2) Subsection (1) applies only if the performer's performance

(a) takes place in Canada or in a Rome Convention country;

(b) is fixed in

(i) a sound recording whose maker, at the time of the first fixation,

(A) if a natural person, was a Canadian citizen or permanent resident within
the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the _Immigration and Refugee Protection
Act_, or a citizen or permanent resident of a Rome Convention country, or

(B) if a corporation, had its headquarters in Canada or in a Rome Convention
country, or

(ii) a sound recording whose first publication in such a quantity as to
satisfy the reasonable demands of the public occurred in Canada or in a Rome
Convention country; or

(c) is transmitted at the time of the performer's performance by a
communication signal broadcast from Canada or a Rome Convention country by a
broadcaster that has its headquarters in the country of broadcast.

(2.1) Subsection (1.1) applies if

(a) the performer's performance takes place in Canada;

(b) the performer's performance is fixed in

(i) a sound recording whose maker, at the time of its first fixation,

(A) was a Canadian citizen or permanent resident as defined in subsection 2(1)
of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, in the case of a natural
person, or

(B) had its headquarters in Canada, in the case of a corporation, or

(ii) a sound recording whose first publication in a quantity sufficient to
satisfy the reasonable demands of the public occurred in Canada; or

(c) the performer's performance is transmitted at the time of its
performance by a communication signal broadcast from Canada by a broadcaster
that has its headquarters in Canada.

(2.2) Subsection (1.1) also applies if

(a) the performer's performance takes place in a WPPT country;

(b) the performer's performance is fixed in

(i) a sound recording whose maker, at the time of its first fixation,

(A) was a citizen or permanent resident of a WPPT country, in the case of
a natural person, or

(B) had its headquarters in a WPPT country, in the case of a corporation, or

(ii) a sound recording whose first publication in a quantity sufficient to
satisfy the reasonable demands of the public occurred in a WPPT country; or

(c) the performer's performance is transmitted at the time of its
performance by a communication signal broadcast from a WPPT country by a
broadcaster that has its headquarters in that country.

Publication

(3) The first publication is deemed to have occurred in a country referred to
in paragraph (2)(b) notwithstanding that it in fact occurred previously
elsewhere, if the interval between those two publications does not exceed
thirty days.

(4) The first publication of a sound recording is deemed to have occurred in
a WPPT country, despite an earlier publication elsewhere, if the interval
between the publication in that WPPT country and the earlier publication
does not exceed 30 days.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 15; 1993, c. 44, s. 61; 1997, c. 24, s. 14; 2001, c.
27, s. 235.

Contractual arrangements

**16. ** Nothing in section 15 prevents the performer from entering into a
contract governing the use of the performer's performance for the purpose of
broadcasting, fixation or retransmission.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 16; 1994, c. 47, s. 59; 1997, c. 24, s. 14.

Cinematographic works

**17. ** (1) Where the performer authorizes the embodiment of the performer's
performance in a cinematographic work, the performer may no longer exercise,
in relation to the performance where embodied in that cinematographic work,
the copyright referred to in subsection 15(1).

Right to remuneration

(2) Where there is an agreement governing the embodiment referred to in
subsection (1) and that agreement provides for a right to remuneration for the
reproduction, performance in public or communication to the public by
telecommunication of the cinematographic work, the performer may enforce that
right against

(a) the other party to the agreement or, if that party assigns the agreement,
the assignee, and

(b) any other person who

(i) owns the copyright in the cinematographic work governing the reproduction
of the cinematographic work, its performance in public or its communication to
the public by telecommunication, and

(ii) reproduces the cinematographic work, performs it in public or
communicates it to the public by telecommunication,

and persons referred to in paragraphs (a) and (b) are jointly and severally
liable to the performer in respect of the remuneration relating to that
copyright.

Application of subsection (2)

(3) Subsection (2) applies only if the performer's performance is embodied in
a prescribed cinematographic work.

Exception

(4) If so requested by a country that is a party to the North American Free
Trade Agreement, the Minister may, by a statement published in the _Canada
Gazette_, grant the benefits conferred by this section, subject to any terms
and conditions specified in the statement, to performers who are nationals of
that country or another country that is a party to the Agreement or are
Canadian citizens or permanent residents within the meaning of subsection 2(1)
of the _Immigration and Refugee Protection Act_ and whose performer's
performances are embodied in works other than the prescribed cinematographic
works referred to in subsection (3).

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 17; 1994, c. 47, s. 59; 1997, c. 24, s. 14; 2001, c.
27, s. 236.

Moral Rights

**17.1 ** (1) In the cases referred to in subsections 15(2.1) and (2.2), a
performer of a live aural performance or a performance fixed in a sound
recording has, subject to subsection 28.2(1), the right to the integrity of
the performance, and — in connection with an act mentioned in subsection
15(1.1) or one for which the performer has a right to remuneration under
section 19 — the right, if it is reasonable in the circumstances, to be
associated with the performance as its performer by name or under a pseudonym
and the right to remain anonymous.

(2) Moral rights may not be assigned but may be waived in whole or in part.

(3) An assignment of copyright in a performer's performance does not by
itself constitute a waiver of any moral rights.

(4) If a waiver of any moral right is made in favour of an owner or a
licensee of a copyright, it may be invoked by any person authorized by the
owner or licensee to use the performer's performance, unless there is an
indication to the contrary in the waiver.

**17.2 ** (1) Subsection 17.1(1) applies only in respect of a performer's
performance that occurs after the coming into force of that subsection.
The moral rights subsist for the same term as the copyright in that
performer's performance.

(2) The moral rights in respect of a performer's performance pass, on the
performer's death, to

(a) the person to whom those rights are specifically bequeathed;

(b) if there is not a specific bequest of those moral rights and the
performer dies testate in respect of the copyright in the performer's
performance, the person to whom that copyright is bequeathed; or

(c) if there is not a person as described in paragraph (a) or (b), the
person entitled to any other property in respect of which the performer
dies intestate.

(3) Subsection (2) applies, with any modifications that the circumstances
require, on the death of any person who holds moral rights.

## Rights of Sound Recording Makers

Copyright in sound recordings

**18. ** (1) Subject to subsection (2), the maker of a sound recording has a
copyright in the sound recording, consisting of the sole right to do the
following in relation to the sound recording or any substantial part thereof:

(a) to publish it for the first time,

(b) to reproduce it in any material form, and

(c) to rent it out,

and to authorize any such acts.

(1.1) Subject to subsections (2.1) and (2.2), a sound recording maker's
copyright in the sound recording also includes the sole right to do the
following acts in relation to the sound recording or any substantial part of
it and to authorize any of those acts:

(a) to make it available to the public by telecommunication in a way that
allows a member of the public to have access to it from a place and at a time
individually chosen by that member of the public and to communicate it to the
public by telecommunication in that way; and

(b) if it is in the form of a tangible object, to sell or otherwise transfer
ownership of the tangible object, as long as that ownership has never
previously been transferred in or outside Canada with the authorization of
the owner of the copyright in the sound recording.

Conditions for copyright

(2) Subsection (1) applies only if

(a) at the time of the first fixation or, if that first fixation was extended
over a considerable period, during any substantial part of that period, the
maker of the sound recording

(i) was a Canadian citizen or permanent resident as defined in subsection 2(1)
of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act,

(ii) was a citizen or permanent resident of a Berne Convention country, a Rome
Convention country, a WPPT country or a country that is a WTO Member, or

(iii) had its headquarters in one of those countries, in the case of a
corporation; or

(b) the first publication of the sound recording in a quantity sufficient to
satisfy the reasonable demands of the public occurred in any country referred
to in paragraph (a).

(2.1) Subsection (1.1) applies if

(a) at the time of the first fixation or, if that first fixation was extended
over a considerable period, during any substantial part of that period, the
maker of the sound recording

(i) was a Canadian citizen or permanent resident as defined in subsection 2(1)
of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act, or

(ii) had its headquarters in Canada, in the case of a corporation; or

(b) the first publication of the sound recording in a quantity sufficient to
satisfy the reasonable demands of the public occurred in Canada.

(2.2) Subsection (1.1) also applies if

(a) at the time of the first fixation or, if that first fixation was extended
over a considerable period, during any substantial part of that period, the
maker of the sound recording

(i) was a citizen or permanent resident of a WPPT country, or

(ii) had its headquarters in a WPPT country, in the case of a corporation; or

(b) the first publication of the sound recording in a quantity sufficient to
satisfy the reasonable demands of the public occurred in a WPPT country.

Publication

(3) The first publication is deemed to have occurred in a country referred to
in paragraph (2)(a) notwithstanding that it in fact occurred previously
elsewhere, if the interval between those two publications does not exceed
thirty days.

(4) The first publication of a sound recording is deemed to have occurred in
a WPPT country, despite an earlier publication elsewhere, if the interval
between the publication in that WPPT country and the earlier publication does
not exceed 30 days.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 18; R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 17(F); 1994, c.
47, s. 59; 1997, c. 24, s. 14; 2001, c. 27, s. 237.

## Provisions Applicable to both Performers and Sound Recording Makers

Right to remuneration

**19. ** (1) If a sound recording has been published, the performer and
maker are entitled, subject to subsection 20(1), to be paid equitable
remuneration for its performance in public or its communication to the public
by telecommunication, except for a communication in the circumstances referred
to in paragraph 15(1.1)(d) or 18(1.1)(a) and any retransmission.

(1.1) If a sound recording has been published, the performer and maker are
entitled, subject to subsections 20(1.1) and (2), to be paid equitable
remuneration for its performance in public or its communication to the
public by telecommunication, except for any retransmission.

(1.2) If a sound recording has been published, the performer and maker are
entitled, subject to subsections 20(1.2) and (2.1), to be paid equitable
remuneration for its performance in public or its communication to the public
by telecommunication, except for a communication in the circumstances referred
to in paragraph 15(1.1)(d) or 18(1.1)(a) and any retransmission.

Royalties

(2) For the purpose of providing the remuneration mentioned in this section,
a person who performs a published sound recording in public or communicates it
to the public by telecommunication is liable to pay royalties

(a) in the case of a sound recording of a musical work, to the collective
society authorized under Part VII to collect them; or

(b) in the case of a sound recording of a literary work or dramatic work, to
either the maker of the sound recording or the performer.

Division of royalties

(3) The royalties, once paid pursuant to paragraph (2)(a) or (b), shall be
divided so that

(a) the performer or performers receive in aggregate fifty per cent; and

(b) the maker or makers receive in aggregate fifty per cent.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 19; 1994, c. 47, s. 59; 1997, c. 24, s. 14.

**19.1 ** Despite subsection 2.2(1), a sound recording that has been made available
to the public by telecommunication in a way that allows a member of the public
to access it from a place and at a time individually chosen by that member of
the public, or that has been communicated to the public by telecommunication
in that way, is deemed to have been published for the purposes of subsection
19(1).

**19.2 ** Despite subsection 2.2(1), a sound recording that has been made
available to the public by telecommunication in a way that allows a member
of the public to access it from a place and at a time individually chosen by
that member of the public, or that has been communicated to the public by
telecommunication in that way, is deemed to have been published for the
purposes of subsection 19(1.2).

Conditions

**20. ** (1) The right to remuneration conferred by subsection 19(1) applies
only if

(a) the maker was, at the date of the first fixation, a Canadian citizen or
permanent resident within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the _Immigration
and Refugee Protection Act_, or a citizen or permanent resident of a Rome
Convention country, or, if a corporation, had its headquarters in Canada; or

(b) all the fixations done for the sound recording occurred in Canada or in a
Rome Convention country.

(1.1) The right to remuneration conferred by subsection 19(1.1) applies only if

(a) the maker was, at the date of the first fixation, a citizen or permanent
resident of a Rome Convention country or, if a corporation, had its
headquarters in a Rome Convention country; or

(b) all the fixations done for the sound recording occurred in a Rome
Convention country.

(1.2) The right to remuneration conferred by subsection 19(1.2) applies only if

(a) the maker was, at the date of the first fixation, a citizen or permanent
resident of a WPPT country or, if a corporation, had its headquarters in a
WPPT country; or

(b) all the fixations done for the sound recording occurred in a WPPT country.

Exception

(2) Despite subsection (1.1), if the Minister is of the opinion that a
Rome Convention country does not grant a right to remuneration, similar in
scope and duration to that provided by subsection 19(1.1), for the performance
in public or the communication to the public of a sound recording whose maker,
at the date of its first fixation, was a Canadian citizen or permanent resident
within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the _Immigration and Refugee
Protection Act_ or, if a corporation, had its headquarters in Canada, the
Minister may, by a statement published in the _Canada Gazette_, limit the
scope and duration of the protection for sound recordings whose first fixation
is done by a maker who is a citizen or permanent resident of that country or,
if a corporation, has its headquarters in that country.

(2.1) Despite subsection (1.2), if the Minister is of the opinion that a WPPT
country does not grant a right to remuneration, similar in scope and duration
to that provided by subsection 19(1.2), for the performance in public or the
communication to the public of a sound recording whose maker, at the date of
its first fixation, was a Canadian citizen or permanent resident within the
meaning of subsection 2(1) of the _Immigration and Refugee Protection Act_ or,
if a corporation, had its headquarters in Canada, the Minister may, by a
statement published in the _Canada Gazette_, limit the scope and duration of
the protection for sound recordings whose first fixation is done by a maker
who is a citizen or permanent resident of that country or, if a corporation,
has its headquarters in that country.

Exception

(3) If so requested by a country that is a party to the North American Free
Trade Agreement, the Minister may, by a statement published in the _Canada
Gazette_, grant the right to remuneration conferred by subsection 19(1.1) to
performers or makers who are nationals of that country and whose sound
recordings embody dramatic or literary works.

Application of section 19

(4) Where a statement is published under subsection (3), section 19 applies

(a) in respect of nationals of a country mentioned in that statement, as if
they were citizens of Canada or, in the case of corporations, had their
headquarters in Canada; and

(b) as if the fixations made for the purpose of their sound recordings had
been made in Canada.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 20; 1994, c. 47, s. 59; 1997, c. 24, s. 14; 2001, c.
27, s. 238.

## Rights of Broadcasters

Copyright in communication signals

**21. ** (1) Subject to subsection (2), a broadcaster has a copyright in the
communication signals that it broadcasts, consisting of the sole right to do
the following in relation to the communication signal or any substantial part
thereof:

(a) to fix it,

(b) to reproduce any fixation of it that was made without the broadcaster's
consent,

(c) to authorize another broadcaster to retransmit it to the public
simultaneously with its broadcast, and

(d) in the case of a television communication signal, to perform it in a place
open to the public on payment of an entrance fee,

and to authorize any act described in paragraph (a), (b) or (d).

Conditions for copyright

(2) Subsection (1) applies only if the broadcaster

(a) at the time of the broadcast, had its headquarters in Canada, in a country
that is a WTO Member or in a Rome Convention country; and

(b) broadcasts the communication signal from that country.

Exception

(3) Notwithstanding subsection (2), if the Minister is of the opinion that a
Rome Convention country or a country that is a WTO Member does not grant the
right mentioned in paragraph (1)(d), the Minister may, by a statement
published in the _Canada Gazette_, declare that broadcasters that have their
headquarters in that country are not entitled to that right.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 21; 1994, c. 47, s. 59; 1997, c. 24, s. 14.

## Reciprocity

Reciprocity

**22. ** (1) If the Minister is of the opinion that a country other than a
Rome Convention country or a WPPT country grants or has undertaken to grant

(a) to performers and to makers of sound recordings, or

(b) to broadcasters

that are Canadian citizens or permanent residents within the meaning of
subsection 2(1) of the _Immigration and Refugee Protection Act_ or, if
corporations, have their headquarters in Canada, as the case may be, whether
by treaty, convention, agreement or law, benefits substantially equivalent to
those conferred by this Part, the Minister may, by a statement published in
the _Canada Gazette_,

(c) grant the benefits conferred by this Part

(i) to performers and to makers of sound recordings, or

(ii) to broadcasters

as the case may be, that are citizens, subjects or permanent residents of or,
if corporations, have their headquarters in that country, and

(d) declare that that country shall, as regards those benefits, be treated as
if it were a country to which this Part extends.

Reciprocity

(2) Where the Minister is of the opinion that a country other than a Rome
Convention country neither grants nor has undertaken to grant

(a) to performers, and to makers of sound recordings, or

(b) to broadcasters

that are Canadian citizens or permanent residents within the meaning of
subsection 2(1) of the _Immigration and Refugee Protection Act_ or, if
corporations, have their headquarters in Canada, as the case may be, whether
by treaty, convention, agreement or law, benefits substantially equivalent to
those conferred by this Part, the Minister may, by a statement published in
the _Canada Gazette_,

(c) grant the benefits conferred by this Part to performers, makers of sound
recordings or broadcasters that are citizens, subjects or permanent residents
of or, if corporations, have their headquarters in that country, as the case
may be, to the extent that that country grants that those benefits to
performers, makers of sound recordings or broadcasters that are Canadian
citizens or permanent residents within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the
_Immigration and Refugee Protection Act_ or, if corporations, have their
headquarters in Canada, and

(d) declare that that country shall, as regards those benefits, be treated as
if it were a country to which this Part extends.

Application of Act

(3) Any provision of this Act that the Minister specifies in a statement
referred to in subsection (1) or (2)

(a) applies in respect of performers, makers of sound recordings or
broadcasters covered by that statement, as if they were citizens of or, if
corporations, had their headquarters in Canada; and

(b) applies in respect of a country covered by that statement, as if that
country were Canada.

Application of Act

(4) Subject to any exceptions that the Minister may specify in a statement
referred to in subsection (1) or (2), the other provisions of this Act also
apply in the way described in subsection (3).

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 22; 1994, c. 47, s. 59; 1997, c. 24, s. 14; 2001, c.
27, s. 239.

## Term of Rights

Term of rights

**23. ** (1) Subject to this Act, copyright in a performer's performance
subsists until the end of 50 years after the end of the calendar year in
which the performance occurs. However,

(a) if the performance is fixed in a sound recording before the copyright
expires, the copyright continues until the end of 50 years after the end of
the calendar year in which the first fixation of the performance in a sound
recording occurs; and

(b) if a sound recording in which the performance is fixed is published before
the copyright expires, the copyright continues until the earlier of the end of
50 years after the end of the calendar year in which the first publication of
the sound recording occurs and the end of 99 years after the end of the
calendar year in which the performance occurs.

(1.1) Subject to this Act, copyright in a sound recording subsists until the
end of 50 years after the end of the calendar year in which the first fixation
of the sound recording occurs. However, if the sound recording is published
before the copyright expires, the copyright continues until the end of
50 years after the end of the calendar year in which the first publication of
the sound recording occurs.

(1.2) Subject to this Act, copyright in a communication signal subsists until
the end of 50 years after the end of the calendar year in which the
communication signal is broadcast.

Term of right to remuneration

(2) The rights to remuneration conferred on performers and makers by section
19 have the same terms, respectively, as those provided by subsections (1)
and (1.1).

Application of subsections (1) and (2)

(3) Subsections (1) and (2) apply whether the fixation, performance or
broadcast occurred before or after the coming into force of this section.

Berne Convention countries, Rome Convention countries, WTO Members

(4) Where the performer's performance, sound recording or communication signal
meets the requirements set out in section 15, 18 or 21, as the case may be, a
country that becomes a Berne Convention country, a Rome Convention country or
a WTO Member after the date of the fixation, performance or broadcast is, as
of becoming a Berne Convention country, Rome Convention country or WTO Member,
as the case may be, deemed to have been such at the date of the fixation,
performance or broadcast.

Where term of protection expired

(5) Subsection (4) does not confer any protection in Canada where the term of
protection in the country referred to in that subsection had expired before
that country became a Berne Convention country, Rome Convention country or WTO
Member, as the case may be.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 23; 1994, c. 47, s. 59; 1997, c. 24, s. 14.

## Ownership of Copyright

Ownership of copyright

**24. ** The first owner of the copyright

(a) in a performer's performance, is the performer;

(b) in a sound recording, is the maker; or

(c) in a communication signal, is the broadcaster that broadcasts it.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 24; 1994, c. 47, s. 59; 1997, c. 24, s. 14.

Assignment of rights

**25. ** Subsections 13(4) to (7) apply, with such modifications as the
circumstances require, in respect of the rights conferred by this Part on
performers, makers of sound recordings and broadcasters.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 25; 1993, c. 44, s. 62; 1994, c. 47, s. 59; 1997, c.
24, s. 14.

## Performers' Rights -- WTO Countries

Performer's performance in WTO country

**26. ** (1) Where a performer's performance takes place on or after January
1, 1996 in a country that is a WTO Member, the performer has, as of the date
of the performer's performance, a copyright in the performer's performance,
consisting of the sole right to do the following in relation to the
performer's performance or any substantial part thereof:

(a) if it is not fixed, to communicate it to the public by telecommunication
and to fix it in a sound recording, and

(b) if it has been fixed in a sound recording without the performer's
authorization, to reproduce the fixation or any substantial part thereof,

and to authorize any such acts.

Where country joins WTO after Jan. 1, 1996

(2) Where a performer's performance takes place on or after January 1, 1996 in
a country that becomes a WTO Member after the date of the performer's
performance, the performer has the copyright described in subsection (1) as of
the date the country becomes a WTO Member.

Performer's performances before Jan. 1, 1996

(3) Where a performer's performance takes place before January 1, 1996 in a
country that is a WTO Member, the performer has, as of January 1, 1996, the
sole right to do and to authorize the act described in paragraph (1)(b).

Where country joins WTO after Jan. 1, 1996

(4) Where a performer's performance takes place before January 1, 1996 in a
country that becomes a WTO Member on or after January 1, 1996, the performer
has the right described in subsection (3) as of the date the country becomes a
WTO Member.

Term of performer's rights

(5) The rights conferred by this section subsist for the remainder of the
calendar year in which the performer's performance takes place and a period of
fifty years following the end of that calendar year.

Assignment of rights

(6) Subsections 13(4) to (7) apply, with such modifications as the
circumstances require, in respect of a performer's rights conferred by this
section.

Limitation

(7) Notwithstanding an assignment of a performer's right conferred by this
section, the performer, as well as the assignee, may

(a) prevent the reproduction of

(i) any fixation of the performer's performance, or

(ii) any substantial part of such a fixation,

where the fixation was made without the performer's consent or the assignee's
consent; and

(b) prevent the importation of any fixation of the performer's performance, or
any reproduction of such a fixation, that the importer knows or ought to have
known was made without the performer's consent or the assignee's consent.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 26; R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 17(F); 1993, c.
44, s. 63; 1994, c. 47, s. 59; 1997, c. 24, s. 14.

# PART III

# INFRINGEMENT OF COPYRIGHT AND MORAL RIGHTS AND EXCEPTIONS TO INFRINGEMENT

## Infringement of Copyright

### General

Infringement generally

**27. ** (1) It is an infringement of copyright for any person to do, without
the consent of the owner of the copyright, anything that by this Act only the
owner of the copyright has the right to do.

Secondary infringement

(2) It is an infringement of copyright for any person to

(a) sell or rent out,

(b) distribute to such an extent as to affect prejudicially the owner of the
copyright,

(c) by way of trade distribute, expose or offer for sale or rental, or exhibit
in public,

(d) possess for the purpose of doing anything referred to in paragraphs (a) to
(c), or

(e) import into Canada for the purpose of doing anything referred to in
paragraphs (a) to (c),

a copy of a work, sound recording or fixation of a performer's performance or
of a communication signal that the person knows or should have known infringes
copyright or would infringe copyright if it had been made in Canada by the
person who made it.

(2.1) For greater certainty, a copy made outside Canada does not infringe
copyright under subsection (2) if, had it been made in Canada, it would have
been made under a limitation or exception under this Act.

(2.2) It is an infringement of copyright for any person to do any of the
following acts with respect to anything that the person knows or should have
known is a lesson, as defined in subsection 30.01(1), or a fixation of one:

(a) to sell it or to rent it out;

(b) to distribute it to an extent that the owner of the copyright in the work
or other subject-matter that is included in the lesson is prejudicially
affected;

(c) by way of trade, to distribute it, expose or offer it for sale or rental or
exhibit it in public;

(d) to possess it for the purpose of doing anything referred to in any of
paragraphs (a) to (c);

(e) to communicate it by telecommunication to any person other than a person
referred to in paragraph 30.01(3)(a); or

(f) to circumvent or contravene any measure taken in conformity with paragraph
30.01(6)(b), (c) or (d).

(2.3) It is an infringement of copyright for a person to provide, by means of
the Internet or another digital network, a service that the person knows or
should have known is designed primarily to enable acts of copyright
infringement if an actual infringement of copyright occurs by means of the
Internet or another digital network as a result of the use of that service.

(2.4) In determining whether a person has infringed copyright under subsection
(2.3), the court may consider

(a) whether the person expressly or implicitly marketed or promoted the
service as one that could be used to enable acts of copyright infringement;

(b) whether the person had knowledge that the service was used to enable a
significant number of acts of copyright infringement;

(c) whether the service has significant uses other than to enable acts of
copyright infringement;

(d) the person's ability, as part of providing the service, to limit acts of
copyright infringement, and any action taken by the person to do so;

(e) any benefits the person received as a result of enabling the acts of
copyright infringement; and

(f) the economic viability of the provision of the service if it were not used
to enable acts of copyright infringement.

Knowledge of importer

(3) In determining whether there is an infringement under subsection (2) in
the case of an activity referred to in any of paragraphs (2)(a) to (d) in
relation to a copy that was imported in the circumstances referred to in
paragraph (2)(e), it is irrelevant whether the importer knew or should have
known that the importation of the copy infringed copyright.

Plates

(4) It is an infringement of copyright for any person to make or possess a
plate that has been specifically designed or adapted for the purpose of making
infringing copies of a work or other subject-matter.

Public performance for profit

(5) It is an infringement of copyright for any person, for profit, to permit a
theatre or other place of entertainment to be used for the performance in
public of a work or other subject-matter without the consent of the owner of
the copyright unless that person was not aware, and had no reasonable ground
for suspecting, that the performance would be an infringement of copyright.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 27; R.S., 1985, c. 1 (3rd Supp.), s. 13, c. 10 (4th
Supp.), s. 5; 1993, c. 44, s. 64; 1997, c. 24, s. 15.

### Parallel Importation of Books

Importation of books

**27.1 ** (1) Subject to any regulations made under subsection (6), it is an
infringement of copyright in a book for any person to import the book where

(a) copies of the book were made with the consent of the owner of the
copyright in the book in the country where the copies were made, but were
imported without the consent of the owner of the copyright in the book in
Canada; and

(b) the person knows or should have known that the book would infringe
copyright if it was made in Canada by the importer.

Secondary infringement

(2) Subject to any regulations made under subsection (6), where the
circumstances described in paragraph (1)(a) exist, it is an infringement of
copyright in an imported book for any person who knew or should have known
that the book would infringe copyright if it was made in Canada by the
importer to

(a) sell or rent out the book;

(b) by way of trade, distribute, expose or offer for sale or rental, or
exhibit in public, the book; or

(c) possess the book for the purpose of any of the activities referred to in
paragraph (a) or (b).

Limitation

(3) Subsections (1) and (2) only apply where there is an exclusive distributor
of the book and the acts described in those subsections take place in the part
of Canada or in respect of the particular sector of the market for which the
person is the exclusive distributor.

Exclusive distributor

(4) An exclusive distributor is deemed, for the purposes of entitlement to any
of the remedies under Part IV in relation to an infringement under this
section, to derive an interest in the copyright in question by licence.

Notice

(5) No exclusive distributor, copyright owner or exclusive licensee is
entitled to a remedy under Part IV in relation to an infringement under this
section unless, before the infringement occurred, notice has been given within
the prescribed time and in the prescribed manner to the person referred to in
subsection (1) or (2), as the case may be, that there is an exclusive
distributor of the book.

Regulations

(6) The Governor in Council may, by regulation, establish terms and conditions
for the importation of certain categories of books, including remaindered
books, books intended solely for re-export and books imported by special
order.

1997, c. 24, s. 15.

**28. ** [Repealed, 1997, c. 24, s. 15]

**28.01 ** [Repealed, 1997, c. 24, s. 16]

**28.02 and 28.03 ** [Repealed, 1997, c. 24, s. 17]

## Moral Rights Infringement

Infringement generally

**28.1 ** Any act or omission that is contrary to any of the moral rights of
the author of a work or of the performer of a performer's performance is, in
the absence the author's or performer's consent, an infringement of those
rights.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 6.

Nature of right of integrity

**28.2 ** (1) The author's or performer's right to the integrity of a work
or performer's performance is infringed only if the work or the performance
is, to the prejudice of its author's or performer's honour or reputation,

(a) distorted, mutilated or otherwise modified; or

(b) used in association with a product, service, cause or institution.

Where prejudice deemed

(2) In the case of a painting, sculpture or engraving, the prejudice referred
to in subsection (1) shall be deemed to have occurred as a result of any
distortion, mutilation or other modification of the work.

When work not distorted, etc.

(3) For the purposes of this section,

(a) a change in the location of a work, the physical means by which a work is
exposed or the physical structure containing a work, or

(b) steps taken in good faith to restore or preserve the work

shall not, by that act alone, constitute a distortion, mutilation or other
modification of the work.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 6.

## Exceptions

### Fair Dealing

Research or private study

**29. ** Fair dealing for the purpose of research, private study, education,
parody or satire does not infringe copyright.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 29; R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 7; 1994, c. 47,
s. 61; 1997, c. 24, s. 18.

Criticism or review

**29.1 ** Fair dealing for the purpose of criticism or review does not
infringe copyright if the following are mentioned:

(a) the source; and

(b) if given in the source, the name of the

(i) author, in the case of a work,

(ii) performer, in the case of a performer's performance,

(iii) maker, in the case of a sound recording, or

(iv) broadcaster, in the case of a communication signal.

1997, c. 24, s. 18.

News reporting

**29.2 ** Fair dealing for the purpose of news reporting does not infringe
copyright if the following are mentioned:

(a) the source; and

(b) if given in the source, the name of the

(i) author, in the case of a work,

(ii) performer, in the case of a performer's performance,

(iii) maker, in the case of a sound recording, or

(iv) broadcaster, in the case of a communication signal.

1997, c. 24, s. 18.

Non-commercial User-generated Content

29.21 (1) It is not an infringement of copyright for an individual to use an
existing work or other subject-matter or copy of one, which has been published
or otherwise made available to the public, in the creation of a new work or
other subject-matter in which copyright subsists and for the individual — or,
with the individ- ual's authorization, a member of their household — to use
the new work or other subject-matter or to authorize an intermediary to
disseminate it, if

(a) the use of, or the authorization to disseminate, the new work or other
subject-matter is done solely for non-commercial purposes;

(b) the source — and, if given in the source, the name of the author,
performer, maker or broadcaster — of the existing work or other
subject-matter or copy of it are mentioned, if it is reasonable in the
circumstances to do so;

(c) the individual had reasonable grounds to believe that the existing work or
other subject-matter or copy of it, as the case may be, was not infringing
copyright; and

(d) the use of, or the authorization to disseminate, the new work or other
subject-matter does not have a substantial adverse effect, financial or
otherwise, on the exploitation or potential exploitation of the existing work
or other subject-matter — or copy of it — or on an existing or potential
market for it, including that the new work or other subject-matter is not a
substitute for the existing one.

Definitions

(2) The following definitions apply in subsection (1).

"intermediary"

"intermediary" means a person or entity who regularly provides space or means
for works or other subject-matter to be enjoyed by the public.

"use"

"use" means to do anything that by this Act the owner of the copyright has the
sole right to do, other than the right to authorize anything.

Reproduction for Private Purposes

**29.22 * (1) It is not an infringement of copyright for an individual to
reproduce
a work or other subject-matter or any substantial part of a work or other
subject-matter if

(a) the copy of the work or other subject-matter from which the reproduction is
made is not an infringing copy;

(b) the individual legally obtained the copy of the work or other
subject-matter from which the reproduction is made, other than by borrowing it
or renting it, and owns or is authorized to use the medium or device on which
it is reproduced;

(c) the individual, in order to make the reproduction, did not circumvent, as
defined in section 41, a technological protection measure, as defined in that
section, or cause one to be circumvented;

(d) the individual does not give the reproduction away; and

(e) the reproduction is used only for private purposes.

Meaning of "medium or device"

(2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)(b), a "medium or device" includes
digital memory in which a work or subject-matter may be stored for the purpose
of allowing the telecommunication of the work or other subject-matter through
the Internet or other digital network.

Limitation — audio recording medium

(3) In the case of a work or other subject-matter that is a musical work
embodied in a sound recording, a performer's performance of a musical work
embodied in a sound recording or a sound recording in which a musical work or a
performer's performance of a musical work is embodied, subsection (1) does
not apply if the reproduction is made onto an audio recording medium as defined
in section 79.

Limitation — destruction of reproductions

(4) Subsection (1) does not apply if the individual gives away, rents or sells
the copy of the work or other subject-matter from which the reproduction is
made without first destroying all reproductions of that copy that the
individual has made under that subsection.

Reproduction for later listening or viewing

**29.23 * (1) It is not an infringement of copyright for an individual to fix a
communication signal, to reproduce a work or sound recording that is being
broadcast or to fix or reproduce a performer's performance that is being
broadcast, in order to record a program for the purpose of listening to or
viewing it later, if

(a) the individual receives the program legally;

(b) the individual, in order to record the program, did not circumvent, as
defined in section 41, a technological protection meas- ure, as defined in that
section, or cause one to be circumvented;

(c) the individual makes no more than one recording of the program;

(d) the individual keeps the recording no longer than is reasonably necessary
in order to listen to or view the program at a more convenient time;

(e) the individual does not give the recording away; and

(f) the recording is used only for private purposes.

Limitation

(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if the individual receives the work,
performer's performance or sound recording under an on-demand service.

Definitions

"broadcast"

"broadcast" means any transmission of a work or other subject-matter by
telecommunication for reception by the public, but does not include a
transmission that is made solely for perform- ance in public.

"on-demand service"

"on-demand service" means a service that allows a person to receive works,
performer's performances and sound recordings at times of their choosing.

Backup Copies

**29.24 ** (1) It is not an infringement of copyright in a work or other
subject-matter for a person who owns — or has a licence to use — a copy of
the work or subject-matter (in this section referred to as the "source
copy") to reproduce the source copy if

(a) the person does so solely for backup purposes in case the source copy is
lost, damaged or otherwise rendered unusable;

(b) the source copy is not an infringing copy;

(c) the person, in order to make the reproduction, did not circumvent, as
defined in section 41, a technological protection meas- ure, as defined in that
section, or cause one to be circumvented; and

(d) the person does not give any of the reproductions away.

Backup copy becomes source copy

(2) If the source copy is lost, damaged or otherwise rendered unusable, one of
the reproductions made under subsection (1) becomes the source copy.

Destruction

(3) The person shall immediately destroy all reproductions made under
subsection (1) after the person ceases to own, or to have a licence to use, the
source copy.

### Acts Undertaken without Motive of Gain

Motive of gain

**29.3 ** (1) No action referred to in section 29.4, 29.5, 30.2 or 30.21 may
be carried out with motive of gain.

Cost recovery

(2) An educational institution, library, archive or museum, or person acting
under its authority does not have a motive of gain where it or the person
acting under its authority, does anything referred to in section 29.4, 29.5,
30.2 or 30.21 and recovers no more than the costs, including overhead costs,
associated with doing that act.

1997, c. 24, s. 18.

### Educational Institutions

Reproduction for instruction

**29.4 ** (1) It is not an infringement of copyright for an educational
institution or a person acting under its authority for the purposes of
education or training on its premises to reproduce a work, or do any other
necessary act, in order to display it.

Reproduction for examinations, etc.

(2) It is not an infringement of copyright for an educational institution or a
person acting under its authority to

(a) reproduce, translate or perform in public on the premises of the
educational institution, or

(b) communicate by telecommunication to the public situated on the premises of
the educational institution

a work or other subject-matter as required for a test or examination.

Where work commercially available

(3) Except in the case of manual reproduction, the exemption from copyright
infringement provided by subsections (1) and (2) does not apply if
the work or other subject-matter is commercially available, within the meaning
of paragraph (a) of the definition "commercially available" in section 2,
in a medium that is appropriate for the purposes referred to in those
subsections.

1997, c. 24, s. 18.

Performances

**29.5 ** It is not an infringement of copyright for an educational
institution or a person acting under its authority to do the following acts if
they are done on the premises of an educational institution for educational or
training purposes and not for profit, before an audience consisting primarily
of students of the educational institution, instructors acting under the
authority of the educational institution or any person who is directly
responsible for setting a curriculum for the educational institution:

(a) the live performance in public, primarily by students of the educational
institution, of a work;

(b) the performance in public of a sound recording or of a work or performer's
performance that is embodied in a sound recording, as long as the sound
recording is not an infringing copy or the person responsible for the
performance has no reasonable grounds to believe that it is an infringing copy;

(c) the performance in public of a work or other subject-matter at the time of
its communication to the public by telecommunication; and

(d) the performance in public of a cinematographic work, as long as the work is
not an infringing copy or the person responsible for the performance has no
reasonable grounds to believe that it is an infringing copy.

1997, c. 24, s. 18.

News and commentary

**29.6 ** (1) It is not an infringement of copyright for an educational
institution or a person acting under its authority to

(a) make, at the time of its communication to the public by telecommunication,
a single copy of a news program or a news commentary program, excluding
documentaries, for the purposes of performing the copy for the students of the
educational institution for educational or training purposes; and

(b) perform the copy in public before an audience consisting primarily of
students of the educational institution on its premises for educational or
training purposes.

Royalties for reproduction and performance

(2) [Repealed, 2010, c. 32, s. 25]

1997, c. 24, s. 18.

Reproduction of broadcast

**29.7 ** (1) Subject to subsection (2) and section 29.9, it is not an
infringement of copyright for an educational institution or a person acting
under its authority to

(a) make a single copy of a work or other subject-matter at the time that it
is communicated to the public by telecommunication; and

(b) keep the copy for up to thirty days to decide whether to perform the copy
for educational or training purposes.

Royalties for reproduction

(2) An educational institution that has not destroyed the copy by the
expiration of the thirty days infringes copyright in the work or other
subject-matter unless it pays any royalties, and complies with any terms and
conditions, fixed under this Act for the making of the copy.

Royalties for performance

(3) It is not an infringement of copyright for the educational institution or
a person acting under its authority to perform the copy in public for
educational or training purposes on the premises of the educational
institution before an audience consisting primarily of students of the
educational institution if the educational institution pays the royalties and
complies with any terms and conditions fixed under this Act for the
performance in public.

1997, c. 24, s. 18.

Unlawful reception

**29.8 ** The exceptions to infringement of copyright provided for under
sections 29.5 to 29.7 do not apply where the communication to the public by
telecommunication was received by unlawful means.

1997, c. 24, s. 18.

Records and marking

**29.9 ** (1) Where an educational institution or person acting under its
authority

(a) [Repealed, 2010, c. 32, s. 26]

(b) makes a copy of a work or other subject-matter communicated to the public
by telecommunication and performs it pursuant to section 29.7,

the educational institution shall keep a record of the information prescribed
by regulation in relation to the making of the copy, the destruction of it or
any performance in public of it for which royalties are payable under this Act
and shall, in addition, mark the copy in the manner prescribed by regulation.

Regulations

(2) The Board may, with the approval of the Governor in Council, make
regulations

(a) prescribing the information in relation to the making, destruction,
performance and marking of copies that must be kept under subsection (1),

(b) prescribing the manner and form in which records referred to in that
subsection must be kept and copies destroyed or marked, and

(c) respecting the sending of information to collective societies referred to
in section 71.

1997, c. 24, s. 18.

Literary collections

**30. ** The publication in a collection, mainly composed of non-copyright
matter, intended for the use of educational institutions, and so described in
the title and in any advertisements issued by the publisher, of short passages
from published literary works in which copyright subsists and not themselves
published for the use of educational institutions, does not infringe copyright
in those published literary works if

(a) not more than two passages from works by the same author are published by
the same publisher within five years;

(b) the source from which the passages are taken is acknowledged; and

(c) the name of the author, if given in the source, is mentioned.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 30; R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 7; 1997, c. 24,
s. 18.

Meaning of "lesson"

**30.01 ** (1) For the purposes of this section, "lesson" means a lesson,
test or examination, or part of one, in which, or during the course of which,
an act is done in respect of a work or other subject-matter by an educational
institution or a person acting under its authority that would otherwise be an
infringement of copyright but is permitted under a limitation or exception
under this Act.

Application

(2) This section does not apply so as to permit any act referred to in
paragraph (3)(a), (b) or (c) with respect to a work or other subject-matter
whose use in the lesson constitutes an infringement of copyright or for whose
use in the lesson the consent of the copyright owner is required.

Communication by telecommunication

(3) Subject to subsection (6), it is not an infringement of copyright for an
educational institution or a person acting under its authority

(a) to communicate a lesson to the public by telecommunication for educational
or training purposes, if that public consists only of students who are enrolled
in a course of which the lesson forms a part or of other persons acting under
the authority of the educational institution;

(b) to make a fixation of the lesson for the purpose of the act referred to in
paragraph (a); or

(c) to do any other act that is necessary for the purpose of the acts referred
to in paragraphs (a) and (b).

Participation by telecommunication

(4) A student who is enrolled in a course of which the lesson forms a part is
deemed to be a person on the premises of the educational institution when the
student participates in or receives the lesson by means of communication by
telecommunication under paragraph (3)(a).

Reproducing lessons

(5) It is not an infringement of copyright for a student who has received a
lesson by means of communication by telecommunication under paragraph (3)(a) to
reproduce the lesson in order to be able to listen to or view it at a more
convenient time. However, the student shall destroy the reproduction within 30
days after the day on which the students who are enrolled in the course to
which the lesson relates have received their final course evaluations.

Conditions

(6) The educational institution and any person acting under its authority,
except a student, shall

(a) destroy any fixation of the lesson within 30 days after the day on which
the students who are enrolled in the course to which the lesson relates have
received their final course evaluations;

(b) take measures that can reasonably be expected to limit the communication by
telecommunication of the lesson to the persons referred to in paragraph (3)(a);

(c) take, in relation to the communication by telecommunication of the lesson
in digital form, measures that can reasonably be expected to prevent the
students from fixing, reproducing or communicating the lesson other than as
they may do under this section; and

(d) take, in relation to a communication by telecommunication in digital form,
any measure prescribed by regulation.

Exception — digital reproduction of works

30.02 (1) Subject to subsections (3) to (5), it is not an infringement of
copyright for an educational institution that has a reprographic reproduction
licence under which the institution is authorized to make reprographic
reproductions of works in a collective society's repertoire for an
educational or training purpose

(a) to make a digital reproduction — of the same general nature and extent as
the reprographic reproduction authorized under the licence — of a paper form
of any of those works;

(b) to communicate the digital reproduction by telecommunication for an
educational or training purpose to persons acting under the authority of the
institution; or

(c) to do any other act that is necessary for the purpose of the acts referred
to in paragraphs (a) and (b).

Exception

(2) Subject to subsections (3) to (5), it is not an infringement of copyright
for a person acting under the authority of the educational institution to whom
the work has been communicated under paragraph (1)(b) to print one copy of the
work.

Conditions

(3) An educational institution that makes a digital reproduction of a work
under paragraph (1)(a) shall

(a) pay to the collective society, with respect to all the persons to whom the
digital reproduction is communicated by the institution under paragraph (1)(b),
the royalties that would be payable if one reprographic reproduction were
distributed by the institution to each of those persons, and comply with the
licence terms and conditions applicable to a reprographic reproduction to the
extent that they are reasonably applicable to a digital reproduction;

(b) take measures to prevent the digital reproduction from being communicated
by telecommunication to any persons who are not acting under the authority of
the institution;

(c) take measures to prevent a person to whom the work has been communicated
under paragraph (1)(b) from printing more than one copy, and to prevent any
other reproduction or communication of the digital reproduction; and

(d) take any measure prescribed by regulation.

Restriction

4) An educational institution may not make a digital reproduction of a work
under paragraph (1)(a) if

(a) the institution has entered into a digital reproduction agreement
respecting the work with a collective society under which the institution may
make a digital reproduction of the work, may communicate the digital
reproduction by telecommunication to persons acting under the authority of the
institution and may permit those persons to print at least one copy of the work;

(b) there is a tariff certified under section 70.15 that is applicable to the
digital reproduction of the work, to the communication of the digital
reproduction by telecommunication to persons acting under the authority of the
institution and to the printing by those persons of at least one copy of the
work; or

(c) the institution has been informed by the collective society that is
authorized to enter into reprographic agreements with respect to the work that
the owner of the copyright in the work has informed it, under subsection (5),
that the owner refuses to authorize the collective society to enter into a
digital reproduction agreement with respect to the work.

Restriction

(5) If the owner of the copyright in a work informs the collective society that
is authorized to enter into reprographic agreements with respect to the work
that the owner refuses to authorize it to enter into digital reproduction
agreements with respect to the work, the collective society shall inform the
educational institutions with which it has entered into reprographic
reproduction agreements with respect to the work that they are not permitted to
make digital reproductions under subsection (1).

Deeming provision

(6) The owner of the copyright in a work who, in respect of the work, has
authorized a collective society to enter into a reprographic reproduction
agreement with an educational institution is deemed to have authorized the
society to enter into a digital reproduction agreement with the institution —
subject to the same restrictions as a reprographic reproduction agreement —
unless the owner has refused to give this authorization under subsection (5) or
has authorized another collective society to enter into a digital reproduction
agreement with respect to the work.

Maximum amount that may be recovered

(7) In proceedings against an educational institution for making a digital
reproduction of a paper form of a work, or for communicating such a
reproduction by telecommunication for an educational or training purpose to
persons acting under the authority of the institution, the owner of the
copyright in the work may not recover an amount more than

(a) in the case where there is a digital reproduction licence that meets the
conditions described in paragraph (4)(a) in respect of the work — or, if none
exists in respect of the work, in respect of a work of the same category —
the amount of royalties that would be payable under that licence in respect of
those acts or, if there is more than one applicable licence, the greatest
amount of royalties payable under any of those licences; and

(b) in the case where there is no licence described in paragraph (a) but there
is a reprographic reproduction licence in respect of the work — or, if none
exists in respect of the work, in respect of a work of the same category —
the amount of royalties that would be payable under that licence in respect of
those acts or, if there is more than one applicable licence, the greatest
amount of royalties payable under any of those licences.

No damages

(8) The owner of the copyright in a work may not recover any damages against a
person acting under the authority of the educational institution who, in
respect of a digital reproduction of the work that is communicated to the
person by telecommunication, prints one copy of the work if, at the time of the
printing, it was reasonable for the person to believe that the communication
was made in accordance with paragraph (1)(b).

Royalties — digital reproduction agreement

30.03 (1) If an educational institution has paid royalties to a collective
society for the digital reproduction of a work under paragraph 30.02(3)(a) and
afterwards the institution enters into a digital reproduction agreement
described in paragraph 30.02(4)(a) with any collective society,

(a) in the case where the institution would — under that digital reproduction
agreement — pay a greater amount of royalties for the digital reproduction of
that work than what was payable under paragraph 30.02(3)(a), the institution
shall pay to the collective society to which it paid royalties under that
paragraph the difference between

(i) the amount of royalties that the institution would have had to pay for the
digital reproduction of that work if the agreement had been entered into on the
day on which the institution first made a digital reproduction under paragraph
30.02(1)(a), and

(ii) the amount of royalties that the institution paid to the society under
paragraph 30.02(3)(a) for the digital reproduction of that work from the day on
which that paragraph comes into force until the day on which they enter into
the digital reproduction agreement; and

(b) in the case where the institution would — under that digital reproduction
agreement — pay a lesser amount of royalties for the digital reproduction of
that work than what was payable under paragraph 30.02(3)(a), the collective
society to which the institution paid royalties under that paragraph shall pay
to the institution the difference between

(i) the amount of royalties that the institution paid to the society under
paragraph 30.02(3)(a) for the digital reproduction of that work from the day on
which that paragraph comes into force until the day on which they enter into
the digital reproduction agreement, and

(ii) the amount of royalties that the institution would have had to pay for the
digital reproduction of that work if the agreement had been entered into on the
day on which the institution first made a digital reproduction under paragraph
30.02(1)(a).

Royalties — tariff

(2) If an educational institution has paid royalties to a collective society
for the digital reproduction of a work under paragraph 30.02(3)(a) and
afterwards a tariff applies to the digital reproduction of that work under
paragraph 30.02(4)(b),

(a) in the case where the institution would — under the tariff — pay a
greater amount of royalties for the digital reproduction of that work than what
was payable under paragraph 30.02(3)(a), the institution shall pay to the
collective society to which it paid royalties under that paragraph the
difference between

(i) the amount of royalties that the institution would have had to pay for the
digital reproduction of that work if the tariff had been certified on the day
on which the institution first made a digital reproduction under paragraph
30.02(1)(a), and

(ii) the amount of royalties that the institution paid to the society under
paragraph 30.02(3)(a) for the digital reproduction of that work from the day on
which that paragraph comes into force until the day on which the tariff is
certified; and

(b) in the case where the institution would — under the tariff — pay a
lesser amount of royalties for the digital reproduction of that work than what
was payable under paragraph 30.02(3)(a), the collective society to which the
institution paid royalties under that paragraph shall pay to the institution
the difference between

(i) the amount of royalties that the institution paid to the society under
paragraph 30.02(3)(a) for the digital reproduction of that work from the day on
which that paragraph comes into force until the day on which the tariff is
certified, and

(ii) the amount of royalties that the institution would have had to pay for the
digital reproduction of that work if the tariff had been certified on the day
on which the institution first made a digital reproduction under paragraph
30.02(1)(a).

Work available through Internet

30.04 (1) Subject to subsections (2) to (5), it is not an infringement of
copyright for an educational institution, or a person acting under the
authority of one, to do any of the following acts for educational or training
purposes in respect of a work or other subject-matter that is available through
the Internet:

(a) reproduce it;

(b) communicate it to the public by telecommunication, if that public primarily
consists of students of the educational institution or other persons acting
under its authority;

(c) perform it in public, if that public primarily consists of students of the
educational institution or other persons acting under its authority; or

(d) do any other act that is necessary for the purpose of the acts referred to
in paragraphs (a) to (c).

Conditions

(2) Subsection (1) does not apply unless the educational institution or person
acting under its authority, in doing any of the acts described in that
subsection in respect of the work or other subject-matter, mentions the
following:

(a) the source; and

(b) if given in the source, the name of

(i) the author, in the case of a work,

(ii) the performer, in the case of a performer's performance,

(iii) the maker, in the case of a sound recording, and

(iv) the broadcaster, in the case of a communication signal.

Non-application

(3) Subsection (1) does not apply if the work or other subject-matter — or
the Internet site where it is posted — is protected by a technological
protection measure that restricts access to the work or other subject-matter or
to the Internet site.

Non-application

(4) Subsection (1) does not permit a person to do any act described in that
subsection in respect of a work or other subject-matter if

(a) that work or other subject-matter — or the Internet site where it is
posted — is protected by a technological protection meas- ure that restricts
the doing of that act; or

(b) a clearly visible notice — and not merely the copyright symbol —
prohibiting that act is posted at the Internet site where the work or other
subject-matter is posted or on the work or other subject-matter itself.

Non-application

(5) Subsection (1) does not apply if the educational institution or person
acting under its authority knows or should have known that the work or other
subject-matter was made available through the Internet without the consent of
the copyright owner.

Regulations

(6) The Governor in Council may make regulations for the purposes of paragraph
(4)(b) prescribing what constitutes a clearly visible notice.

### Libraries, Archives and Museums

Management and maintenance of collection

**30.1 ** (1) It is not an infringement of copyright for a library, archive or
museum or a person acting under the authority of a library, archive or museum
to make, for the maintenance or management of its permanent collection or the
permanent collection of another library, archive or museum, a copy of a work
or other subject-matter, whether published or unpublished, in its permanent
collection

(a) if the original is rare or unpublished and is

(i) deteriorating, damaged or lost, or

(ii) at risk of deterioration or becoming damaged or lost;

(b) for the purposes of on-site consultation if the original cannot be viewed,
handled or listened to because of its condition or because of the atmospheric
conditions in which it must be kept;

(c) in an alternative format if the library, archive or museum or a person
acting under the authority of the library, archive or museum considers that the
original is currently in a format that is obsolete or is becoming obsolete, or
that the technology required to use the original is unavailable or is becoming
unavailable;

(d) for the purposes of internal record-keeping and cataloguing;

(e) for insurance purposes or police investigations; or

(f) if necessary for restoration.

Limitation

(2) Paragraphs (1)(a) to (c) do not apply where an appropriate copy is
commercially available in a medium and of a quality that is appropriate for
the purposes of subsection (1).

Destruction of intermediate copies

(3) If a person must make an intermediate copy in order to make a copy under
subsection (1), the person must destroy the intermediate copy as soon as it is
no longer needed.

Regulations

(4) The Governor in Council may make regulations with respect to the procedure
for making copies under subsection (1).

1997, c. 24, s. 18; 1999, c. 31, s. 59(E).

Research or private study

**30.2 ** (1) It is not an infringement of copyright for a library, archive or
museum or a person acting under its authority to do anything on behalf of any
person that the person may do personally under section 29 or 29.1.

Copies of articles for research, etc.

(2) It is not an infringement of copyright for a library, archive or museum or
a person acting under the authority of a library, archive or museum to make,
by reprographic reproduction, for any person requesting to use the copy for
research or private study, a copy of a work that is, or that is contained in,
an article published in

(a) a scholarly, scientific or technical periodical; or

(b) a newspaper or periodical, other than a scholarly, scientific or technical
periodical, if the newspaper or periodical was published more than one year
before the copy is made.

Restriction

(3) Paragraph (2)(b) does not apply in respect of a work of fiction or poetry
or a dramatic or musical work.

Conditions

(4) A library, archive or museum may provide the person for whom the copy is
made under subsection (2) with the copy only on the condition that

(a) the person is provided with a single copy of the work; and

(b) the library, archive or museum informs the person that the copy is to be
used solely for research or private study and that any use of the copy for a
purpose other than research or private study may require the authorization of
the copyright owner of the work in question.

Patrons of other libraries, etc.

(5) Subject to subsection (5.02), a library, archive or museum or a person
acting under the authority of a library, archive or museum may do, on behalf of
a person who is a patron of another library, archive or museum, anything under
subsection (1) or (2) in relation to printed matter that it is authorized by
this section to do on behalf of a person who is one of its patrons, but the
copy given to the patron must not be in digital form.

Deeming

(5.01) For the purpose of subsection (5), the making of a copy of a work other
than by reprographic reproduction is deemed to be a making of a copy of the
work that may be done under subsection (2).

Limitation regarding copies in digital form

(5.02) A library, archive or museum, or a person acting under the authority of
one, may, under subsection (5), provide a copy in digital form to a person who
has requested it through another library, archive or museum if the providing
library, archive or museum or person takes measures to prevent the person who
has requested it from

(a) making any reproduction of the digital copy, including any paper copies,
other than printing one copy of it;

(b) communicating the digital copy to any other person; and

(c) using the digital copy for more than five business days from the day on
which the person first uses it.

Destruction of intermediate copies

(5.1) Where an intermediate copy is made in order to copy a work referred to
in subsection (5), once the copy is given to the patron, the intermediate copy
must be destroyed.

Regulations

(6) The Governor in Council may, for the purposes of this section, make
regulations

(a) defining "newspaper" and "periodical";

(b) defining scholarly, scientific and technical periodicals;

(c) prescribing the information to be recorded about any action taken under
subsection (1) or (5) and the manner and form in which the information is to
be kept; and

(d) prescribing the manner and form in which the conditions set out in
subsection (4) are to be met.

1997, c. 24, s. 18.

Copying works deposited in archive

**30.21 ** (1) Subject to subsections (3) and (3.1), it is not an infringement
of copyright for an archive to make, for any person requesting to use the copy
for research or private study, a copy of an unpublished work that is deposited
in the archive and provide the person with it.

Notice

(2) When a person deposits a work in an archive, the archive must give the
person notice that it may copy the work in accordance with this section.

Conditions for copying of works

(3) The archive may only copy the work only on the condition that

(a) the person who deposited the work, if a copyright owner, did not, at the
time the work was deposited, prohibit its copying; and

(b) copying has not been prohibited by any other owner of copyright in the
work.

Condition for providing copy

(3.1) The archive may provide the person for whom a copy is made under
subsection (1) with the copy only on the condition that

(a) the person is provided with a single copy of the work; and

(b) the archive informs the person that the copy is to be used solely for
research or private study and that any use of the copy for a purpose other than
research or private study may require the authorization of the copyright owner
of the work in question.

Regulations

(4) The Governor in Council may prescribe by regulation the manner and form in
which the conditions set out in subsections (3) and (3.1) may be met.

(5) to (7) [Repealed, 2004, c. 11, s. 21]

1997, c. 24, s. 18; 1999, c. 31, s. 60(E); 2004, c. 11, s. 21.

### Machines Installed in Educational Institutions, Libraries, Archives and
Museums

No infringement by educational institution, etc.

**30.3 ** (1) An educational institution or a library, archive or museum does
not infringe copyright where

(a) a copy of a work is made using a machine for the making, by reprographic
reproduction, of copies of works in printed form;

(b) the machine is installed by or with the approval of the educational
institution, library, archive or museum on its premises for use by students,
instructors or staff at the educational institution or by persons using the
library, archive or museum; and

(c) there is affixed in the prescribed manner and location a notice warning of
infringement of copyright.

Application

(2) Subsection (1) only applies if, in respect of a reprographic reproduction,

(a) the educational institution, library, archive or museum has entered into
an agreement with a collective society that is authorized by copyright owners
to grant licences on their behalf;

(b) the Board has, in accordance with section 70.2, fixed the royalties and
related terms and conditions in respect of a licence;

(c) a tariff has been approved in accordance with section 70.15; or

(d) a collective society has filed a proposed tariff in accordance with
section 70.13.

Order

(3) Where a collective society offers to negotiate or has begun to negotiate
an agreement referred to in paragraph (2)(a), the Board may, at the request of
either party, order that the educational institution, library, archive or
museum be treated as an institution to which subsection (1) applies, during
the period specified in the order.

Agreement with copyright owner

(4) Where an educational institution, library, archive or museum has entered
into an agreement with a copyright owner other than a collective society
respecting reprographic reproduction, subsection (1) applies only in respect
of the works of the copyright owner that are covered by the agreement.

Regulations

(5) The Governor in Council may, for the purposes of paragraph 1(c), prescribe
by regulation the manner of affixing and location of notices and the
dimensions, form and contents of notices.

1997, c. 24, s. 18.

### Libraries, Archives and Museums in Educational Institutions

Application to libraries, etc. within educational institutions

**30.4 ** For greater certainty, the exceptions to infringement of copyright
provided for under sections 29.4 to 30.3 and 45 also apply in respect of a
library, archive or museum that forms part of an educational institution.

1997, c. 24, s. 18.

### Library and Archives of Canada

Permitted acts

**30.5 ** It is not an infringement of copyright for the Librarian and
Archivist of Canada under the _Library and Archives of Canada Act_, to

(a) make a copy of a work or other subject-matter in taking a representative
sample for the purpose of preservation under subsection 8(2) of that Act;

(b) effect the fixation of a copy of a publication, as defined in section 2 of
that Act, that is provided by telecommunication in accordance with subsection
10(1) of that Act;

(c) make a copy of a recording, as defined in subsection 11(2) of that Act,
for the purposes of section 11 of that Act; or

(d) at the time that a broadcasting undertaking, as defined in subsection 2(1)
of the _Broadcasting Act_, communicates a work or other subject-matter to the
public by telecommunication, make a copy of the work or other subject-matter
that is included in that communication.

1997, c. 24, s. 18; 2004, c. 11, s. 25.

### Computer Programs

Permitted acts

**30.6 ** It is not an infringement of copyright in a computer program for a
person who owns a copy of the computer program that is authorized by the owner
of the copyright, or has a licence to use a copy of the computer program, to

(a) reproduce the copy by adapting, modifying or converting it,
or translating it into another computer
language if the person proves that the reproduced copy is

(i) essential for the compatibility of the computer program with a particular
computer,

(ii) is solely for the person's own use, and

(iii) was destroyed immediately after the person ceased to be the owner of the
copy of the computer program or to have a licence to use it; or

(b) reproduce for backup purposes of the copy or of a
reproduced copy referred to in paragraph (a) if the person proves that the
reproduction for backup purposes was destroyed immediately after the person
ceased to be the owner of the copy of the computer program or to have a
licence to use it.

1997, c. 24, s. 18.

Interoperability of computer programs

**30.61 ** It is not an infringement of copyright in a computer program for a
person who owns a copy of the computer program that is authorized by the owner
of the copyright, or has a licence to use a copy of the computer program, to
reproduce the copy for the sole purpose of obtaining information that would
allow the person to make the program and any other computer program
interoperable.

Encryption Research

30.62 It is not an infringement of copyright for a person to reproduce a work
or other subject-matter for the purposes of encryption research if

(a) it would not be practical to carry out the research without making the copy;

(b) the person has lawfully obtained the work or other subject-matter; and

(c) the person has informed the owner of the copyright in the work or other
subject-matter.

Security

30.63 It is not an infringement of copyright for a person to reproduce a work
or other subject-matter for the sole purpose, with the consent of the owner or
administrator of a computer, computer system or computer network, of assessing
the vulnerability of the computer, system or network or of correcting any
security flaws.

### Incidental Inclusion

Incidental use

**30.7 ** It is not an infringement of copyright to incidentally and not
deliberately

(a) include a work or other subject-matter in another work or other subject-
matter; or

(b) do any act in relation to a work or other subject-matter that is
incidentally and not deliberately included in another work or other subject-
matter.

1997, c. 24, s. 18.

Temporary Reproductions for Technological Processes

30.71 It is not an infringement of copyright to make a reproduction of a work
or other subject-matter if

(a) the reproduction forms an essential part of a technological process;

(b) the reproduction's only purpose is to facilitate a use that is not an
infringement of copyright; and

(c) the reproduction exists only for the duration of the technological process.

### Ephemeral Recordings

Ephemeral recordings

**30.8 ** (1) It is not an infringement of copyright for a programming
undertaking to fix or reproduce in accordance with this section a performer's
performance or work, other than a cinematographic work, that is performed live
or a sound recording that is performed at the same time as the performer's
performance or work, if the undertaking

(a) is authorized to communicate the performer's performance, work or sound
recording to the public by telecommunication;

(b) makes the fixation or the reproduction itself, for its own broadcasts;

(c) does not synchronize the fixation or reproduction with all or part of
another recording, performer's performance or work; and

(d) does not cause the fixation or reproduction to be used in an advertisement
intended to sell or promote, as the case may be, a product, service, cause or
institution.

Record keeping

(2) The programming undertaking must record the dates of the making and
destruction of all fixations and reproductions and any other prescribed
information about the fixation or reproduction, and keep the record current.

Right of access by copyright owners

(3) The programming undertaking must make the record referred to in subsection
(2) available to owners of copyright in the works, sound recordings or
performer's performances, or their representatives, within twenty-four hours
after receiving a request.

Destruction

(4) The programming undertaking must destroy the fixation or reproduction
within thirty days after making it, unless

(a) the copyright owner authorizes its retention; or

(b) it is deposited in an archive, in accordance with subsection (6).

Royalties

(5) Where the copyright owner authorizes the fixation or reproduction to be
retained after the thirty days, the programming undertaking must pay any
applicable royalty.

Archive

(6) Where the programming undertaking considers a fixation or reproduction to
be of an exceptional documentary character, the undertaking may, with the
consent of an official archive, deposit it in the official archive and must
notify the copyright owner, within thirty days, of the deposit of the fixation
or reproduction.

Definition of "official archive"

(7) In subsection (6), "official archive" means the Library and Archives of
Canada or any archive established under the law of a province for the
preservation of the official archives of the province.

Application

(8) This section does not apply where a licence is available from a collective
society to make the fixation or reproduction of the performer's performance,
work or sound recording.

Telecommunications by networks

(9) A broadcasting undertaking, as defined in the _Broadcasting Act_, may make
a single reproduction of a fixation or reproduction made by a programming
undertaking and communicate it to the public by telecommunication, within the
period referred to in subsection (4), if the broadcasting undertaking meets
the conditions set out in subsection (1) and is part of a prescribed network
that includes the programming undertaking.

Limitations

(10) The reproduction and communication to the public by telecommunication
must be made

(a) in accordance with subsections (2) to (6); and

(b) within thirty days after the day on which the programming undertaking made
the fixation or reproduction.

Definition of "programming undertaking"

(11) In this section, "programming undertaking" means

(a) a programming undertaking as defined in subsection 2(1) of the
_Broadcasting Act_;

(b) a programming undertaking described in paragraph (a) that originates
programs within a network, as defined in subsection 2(1) of the _Broadcasting
Act_; or

(c) a distribution undertaking as defined in subsection 2(1) of the
_Broadcasting Act_, in respect of the programs that it originates.

The undertaking must hold a broadcasting licence issued by the Canadian
Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission under the Broadcasting Act,
or be exempted from this requirement by the Canadian Radio-television and
Telecommunications Commission.

1997, c. 24, s. 18; 2004, c. 11, s. 26.

Pre-recorded recordings

**30.9 ** (1) It is not an infringement of copyright for a broadcasting
undertaking to reproduce in accordance with this section a sound recording, or
a performer's performance or work that is embodied in a sound recording,
solely for the purpose of their broadcasting, if the undertaking

(a) owns the copy of the sound recording, performer's performance or work and
that copy is authorized by the owner of the copyright, or has a licence to use
the copy;

(b) is authorized to communicate the sound recording, performer's performance
or work to the public by telecommunication;

(c) makes the reproduction itself, for its own broadcasts;

(d) does not synchronize the reproduction with all or part of another
recording, performer's performance or work; and

(e) does not cause the reproduction to be used in an advertisement intended to
sell or promote, as the case may be, a product, service, cause or institution.

Record keeping

(2) The broadcasting undertaking must record the dates of the making and
destruction of all reproductions and any other prescribed information about
the reproduction, and keep the record current.

Right of access by copyright owners

(3) The broadcasting undertaking must make the record referred to in
subsection (2) available to owners of copyright in the sound recordings,
performer's performances or works, or their representatives, within twenty-
four hours after receiving a request.

Destruction

(4) The broadcasting undertaking must destroy the reproduction when it no
longer possesses the sound recording or performer's performance or work
embodied in the sound recording, or its licence to use the sound recording,
performer's performance or work expires, or at the latest within thirty days
after making the reproduction, unless the copyright owner authorizes the
reproduction to be retained.

Royalty

(5) If the copyright owner authorizes the reproduction to be retained, the
broadcasting undertaking must pay any applicable royalty.

Application

(6) [Repealed, 2010, c. 32, s. 34]

Definition of "broadcasting undertaking"

(7) In this section, "broadcasting undertaking" means a broadcasting
undertaking as defined in subsection 2(1) of the _Broadcasting Act_ that holds
a broadcasting licence issued by the Canadian Radio-television and
Telecommunications Commission under that Act.

1997, c. 24, s. 18.

### Retransmission

Interpretation

**31. ** (1) In this section,


"new media retransmitter"

"new media retransmitter" means a person whose retransmission is lawful under
the _Broadcasting Act_ only by reason of the _Exemption Order for New Media
Broadcasting Undertakings_ issued by the Canadian Radio-television and
Telecommunications Commission as Appendix A to Public Notice CRTC 1999-197, as
amended from time to time;


"retransmitter"

"retransmitter" means a person who performs a function comparable to that of a
cable retransmission system, but does not include a new media retransmitter;


"signal"

"signal" means a signal that carries a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic
work and is transmitted for free reception by the public by a terrestrial
radio or terrestrial television station.

Retransmission of local and distant signals

(2) It is not an infringement of copyright for a retransmitter to communicate
to the public by telecommunication any literary, dramatic, musical or artistic
work if

(a) the communication is a retransmission of a local or distant signal;

(b) the retransmission is lawful under the _Broadcasting Act_;

(c) the signal is retransmitted simultaneously and without alteration, except
as otherwise required or permitted by or under the laws of Canada;

(d) in the case of the retransmission of a distant signal, the retransmitter
has paid any royalties, and complied with any terms and conditions, fixed
under this Act; and

(e) the retransmitter complies with the applicable conditions, if any,
referred to in paragraph (3)(b).

Regulations

(3) The Governor in Council may make regulations

(a) defining "local signal" and "distant signal" for the purposes of
subsection (2); and

(b) prescribing conditions for the purposes of paragraph (2)(e), and
specifying whether any such condition applies to all retransmitters or only to
a class of retransmitter.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 31; R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 7; 1988, c. 65,
s. 63; 1997, c. 24, ss. 16, 52(F); 2002, c. 26, s. 2.

Network Services

31.1 (1) A person who, in providing serv- ices related to the operation of the
Internet or another digital network, provides any means for the
telecommunication or the reproduction of a work or other subject-matter through
the Internet or that other network does not, solely by reason of providing
those means, infringe copyright in that work or other subject-matter.

Exception

(2) Subsection (1) does not apply in respect of a service provided by the
person if the provision of that service constitutes an infringement of
copyright under subsection 27(2.3).

Incidental acts

(3) Subject to subsection (4), a person referred to in subsection (1) who
caches the work or other subject-matter, or does any similar act in relation to
it, to make the telecommunication more efficient does not, by virtue of that
act alone, infringe copyright in the work or other subject-matter.

Conditions for application

(4) Subsection (3) does not apply unless the person, in respect of the work or
other subject-matter,

(a) does not modify it, other than for technical reasons;

(b) ensures that any directions related to its caching or the doing of any
similar act, as the case may be, that are established by whoever made it
available for telecommunication through the Internet or another digital
network, and that lend themselves to automated reading and execution, are read
and executed; and

(c) does not interfere with the lawful use of technology to obtain data on its
use.

Hosting

(5) Subject to subsection (6), a person who, for the purpose of allowing the
telecommunication of a work or other subject-matter through the Internet or
another digital network, provides digital memory in which another person stores
the work or other subject-matter does not, by virtue of that act alone,
infringe copyright in the work or other subject-matter.

Condition for application

(6) Subsection (5) does not apply in respect of a work or other subject-matter
if the person providing the digital memory knows of a decision of a court of
competent jurisdiction to the effect that the person who has stored the work or
other subject-matter in the digital memory infringes copyright by making the
copy of the work or other subject-matter that is stored or by the way in which
he or she uses the work or other subject-matter.

### Persons with Perceptual Disabilities

Reproduction in alternate format

**32. ** (1) It is not an infringement of copyright for a person with a
perceptual disability, for a person acting at the request of such a person or
for a non-profit organization acting for the benefit of such a person to

(a) make a copy or sound recording of a literary, musical, artistic or
dramatic work, other than a cinematographic work, in a format specially
designed for persons with a perceptual disability;

(b) translate, adapt or reproduce in sign language a literary or dramatic
work, other than a cinematographic work, in a format specially designed for
persons with a perceptual disability; or

(c) perform in public a literary or dramatic work, other than a
cinematographic work, in sign language, either live or in a format specially
designed for persons with a perceptual disability.

Limitation

(2) Subsection (1) does not authorize the making of a large print book.

Limitation

(3) Subsection (1) does not apply where the work or sound recording is
commercially available in a format specially designed to meet the needs of any
person referred to in that subsection, within the meaning of paragraph (a) of
the definition "commercially available".

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 32; R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 7; 1997, c. 24,
s. 19.

Sending copies outside Canada

**32.01 ** (1) Subject to this section, it is not an infringement of copyright
for a non-profit organization acting for the benefit of persons with a print
disability to make a copy, in a format specially designed for persons with a
print disability, of a work and to send the copy to a non-profit organization
in another country for use by persons with print disabilities in that country,
if the author of the work that is reformatted is

(a) a Canadian citizen or permanent resident within the meaning of subsection
2(1) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act; or

(b) a citizen or permanent resident of the country to which the copy is sent.

Limitation

(2) Subsection (1) does not authorize a large print book or a cinematographic
work to be sent outside Canada.

Work available in country

(3) Subsection (1) does not authorize a copy to be sent to a country if the
organization knows or has reason to believe that the work, in the format
specially designed for persons with a print disability, is available in that
country within a reasonable time and for a reasonable price, and may be located
in that country with reasonable effort.

Royalty

(4) The organization making and sending the copy shall pay, in accordance with
the regulations, any royalty established under the regulations to the copyright
owner in the work.

If copyright owner cannot be located

(5) If the organization cannot locate the copyright owner, despite making
reasonable efforts to do so, the organization shall pay, in accordance with the
regulations, any royalty established under the regulations to a collective
society.

Reports

(6) The organization making and sending the copy shall submit reports to an
authority in accordance with the regulations on the organization's activities
under this section.

Regulations

(7) The Governor in Council may make regulations

(a) requiring a non-profit organization that seeks to send a copy outside
Canada to, before doing so, enter into a contract with the recipient non-profit
organization with respect to the use of the copy;

(b) respecting the form and content of such contracts;

(c) respecting any royalties to be paid under subsections (4) and (5);

(d) respecting to which collective society a royalty is payable in relation to
works or classes of works for the purposes of subsection (5);

(e) respecting what constitutes reasonable efforts for the purposes of
subsection (5); and

(f) respecting the reports to be made, and the authorities to which the reports
are to be submitted, under subsection (6).

Meaning of "print disability"

(8) In this section, "print disability" means a disability that prevents or
inhibits a person from reading a literary, musical or dramatic work in its
original format, and includes such a disability resulting from

(a) severe or total impairment of sight or the inability to focus or move
one's eyes;

(b) the inability to hold or manipulate a book; or

(c) an impairment relating to comprehension.

### Statutory Obligations

No infringement

**32.1 ** (1) It is not an infringement of copyright for any person

(a) to disclose, pursuant to the _Access to Information Act_, a record within
the meaning of that Act, or to disclose, pursuant to any like Act of the
legislature of a province, like material;

(b) to disclose, pursuant to the _Privacy Act_, personal information within
the meaning of that Act, or to disclose, pursuant to any like Act of the
legislature of a province, like information;

(c) to make a copy of an object referred to in section 14 of the _Cultural
Property Export and Import Act_, for deposit in an institution pursuant to a
direction under that section; and

(d) to make a fixation or copy of a work or other subject-matter in order to
comply with the _Broadcasting Act_ or any rule, regulation or other instrument
made under it.

Limitation

(2) Nothing in paragraph (1)(a) or (b) authorizes a person to whom a record or
information is disclosed to do anything that, by this Act, only the owner of
the copyright in the record, personal information or like information, as the
case may be, has a right to do.

Destruction of fixation or copy

(3) Unless the _Broadcasting Act_ otherwise provides, a person who makes a
fixation or copy under paragraph (1)(d) shall destroy it immediately on the
expiration of the period for which it must be kept pursuant to that Act, rule,
regulation or other instrument.

1997, c. 24, s. 19.

### Miscellaneous

Permitted acts

**32.2 ** (1) It is not an infringement of copyright

(a) for an author of an artistic work who is not the owner of the copyright in
the work to use any mould, cast, sketch, plan, model or study made by the
author for the purpose of the work, if the author does not thereby repeat or
imitate the main design of the work;

(b) for any person to reproduce, in a painting, drawing, engraving, photograph
or cinematographic work

(i) an architectural work, provided the copy is not in the nature of an
architectural drawing or plan, or

(ii) a sculpture or work of artistic craftsmanship or a cast or model of a
sculpture or work of artistic craftsmanship, that is permanently situated in a
public place or building;

(c) for any person to make or publish, for the purposes of news reporting or
news summary, a report of a lecture given in public, unless the report is
prohibited by conspicuous written or printed notice affixed before and
maintained during the lecture at or about the main entrance of the building in
which the lecture is given, and, except while the building is being used for
public worship, in a position near the lecturer;

(d) for any person to read or recite in public a reasonable extract from a
published work;

(e) for any person to make or publish, for the purposes of news reporting or
news summary, a report of an address of a political nature given at a public
meeting; or

(f) for an individual to use for private or non-commercial purposes, or permit
the use of for those purposes, a photograph or portrait that was commissioned
by the individual for personal purposes and made for valuable consideration,
unless the individual and the owner of the copyright in the photograph or
portrait have agreed otherwise.

Further permitted acts

(2) It is not an infringement of copyright for a person to do any of the
following acts without motive of gain at any agricultural or agricultural-
industrial exhibition or fair that receives a grant from or is held by its
directors under federal, provincial or municipal authority:

(a) the live performance in public of a musical work;

(b) the performance in public of a sound recording embodying a musical work or
a performer's performance of a musical work; or

(c) the performance in public of a communication signal carrying

(i) the live performance in public of a musical work, or

(ii) a sound recording embodying a musical work or a performer's performance
of a musical work.

Further permitted acts

(3) No religious organization or institution, educational institution and no
charitable or fraternal organization shall be held liable to pay any
compensation for doing any of the following acts in furtherance of a
religious, educational or charitable object:

(a) the live performance in public of a musical work;

(b) the performance in public of a sound recording embodying a musical work or
a performer's performance of a musical work; or

(c) the performance in public of a communication signal carrying

(i) the live performance in public of a musical work, or

(ii) a sound recording embodying a musical work or a performer's performance
of a musical work.

1997, c. 24, s. 19.

## Interpretation

No right to equitable remuneration

**32.3 ** For the purposes of sections 29 to 32.2, an act that does not
infringe copyright does not give rise to a right to remuneration conferred by
section 19.

1997, c. 24, s. 19.

## Compensation for Acts Done Before Recognition of Copyright of Performers
and Broadcasters

Certain rights and interests protected

**32.4 ** (1) Notwithstanding section 27, where a person has, before the later
of January 1, 1996 and the day on which a country becomes a WTO member,
incurred an expenditure or liability in connection with, or in preparation
for, the doing of an act that would have infringed copyright under section 26
commencing on the later of those days, had that country been a WTO member, any
right or interest of that person that

(a) arises from or in connection with the doing of that act, and

(b) is subsisting and valuable on the later of those days

is not prejudiced or diminished by reason only that that country has become a
WTO member, except as provided by an order of the Board made under subsection
78(3).

Compensation

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), a person's right or interest that is
protected by that subsection terminates if and when the owner of the copyright
pays that person such compensation as is agreed to between the parties or,
failing agreement, as is determined by the Board in accordance with section
78.

Limitation

(3) Nothing in subsections (1) and (2) affects any right of a performer
available in law or equity.

1997, c. 24, s. 19.

Certain rights and interests protected

**32.5 ** (1) Notwithstanding section 27, where a person has, before the later
of the coming into force of Part II and the day on which a country becomes a
Rome Convention country, incurred an expenditure or liability in connection
with, or in preparation for, the doing of an act that would have infringed
copyright under section 15 or 21 commencing on the later of those days, had
Part II been in force or had that country been a Rome Convention country, any
right or interest of that person that

(a) arises from or in connection with the doing of that act, and

(b) is subsisting and valuable on the later of those days

is not prejudiced or diminished by reason only that Part II has come into
force or that the country has become a Rome Convention country, except as
provided by an order of the Board made under subsection 78(3).

Compensation

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), a person's right or interest that is
protected by that subsection terminates if and when the owner of the copyright
pays that person such compensation as is agreed to between the parties or,
failing agreement, as is determined by the Board in accordance with section
78.

Limitation

(3) Nothing in subsections (1) and (2) affects any right of a performer
available in law or equity.

1997, c. 24, s. 19.

Certain rights and interests protected

**32.6 ** Despite sections 27, 28.1 and 28.2, if a person has, before the day
on which subsection 15(1.1), 17.1(1) or 18(1.1) applies in respect of a
particular performers' performance or sound recording, incurred an
expenditure or a liability in connection with, or in preparation for, the doing
of an act that would, if done after that day, have infringed rights under that
subsection, any right or interest of that person that arises from, or in
connection with, the doing of that act and that is subsisting and valuable on
that day is not, for two years after the day on which this section comes into
force, prejudiced or diminished by reason only of the subsequent application of
that subsection in respect of the performers' performance or sound recording.

## Compensation for Acts Done Before Recognition of Copyright or Moral Rights

Certain rights and interests protected

**33. ** (1) Despite subsections 27(1), (2) and (4) and sections 27.1, 28.1 and
28.2, if a person has, before the later of January 1, 1996 and the day on which
a country becomes a treaty country other than a WCT country, incurred an
expenditure or liability in connection with, or in preparation for, the doing
of an act that, if that country had been such a treaty country, would have
infringed copyright in a work or moral rights in respect of a work, any right
or interest of that person that arises from, or in connection with, the doing
of that act and that is subsisting and valuable on the later of those days is
not, except as provided by an order of the Board made under subsection 78(3),
prejudiced or diminished by reason only of that country having become such a
treaty country.

Compensation

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), a person's right or interest that is
protected by that subsection terminates, as against the copyright owner or
author, if and when that copyright owner or the author, as the case may be,
pays that person such compensation as is agreed to between the parties or,
failing agreement, as is determined by the Board in accordance with section
78.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 33; R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 7; 1997, c. 24,
s. 19.

Certain rights and interests protected

**33.1 ** (1) Despite subsections 27(1), (2) and (4) and sections 27.1, 28.1
and 28.2, if a person has, before the later of the day on which this section
comes into force and the day on which a country that is a treaty country but
not a WCT country becomes a WCT country, incurred an expenditure or liability
in connection with, or in preparation for, the doing of an act that, if that
country had been a WCT country, would have infringed a right under paragraph
3(1)(j), any right or interest of that person that arises from, or in
connection with, the doing of that act and that is subsisting and valuable on
the later of those days is not, except as provided by an order of the Board
made under subsection 78(3), prejudiced or diminished by reason only of that
country having become a WCT country.

Compensation

(2) Despite subsection (1), a person's right or interest that is protected by
that subsection terminates as against the copyright owner if and when the owner
pays the person any compensation that is agreed to between the parties or,
failing agreement, that is determined by the Board in accordance with section
78.

Certain rights and interests protected

**33.2 ** (1) Despite subsections 27(1), (2) and (4) and sections 27.1, 28.1
and 28.2, if a person has, before the later of the day on which this section
comes into force and the day on which a country that is not a treaty country
becomes a WCT country, incurred an expenditure or a liability in connection
with, or in preparation for, the doing of an act that, if that country had been
a WCT country, would have infringed copyright in a work or moral rights in
respect of a work, any right or interest of that person that arises from, or in
connection with, the doing of that act and that is subsisting and valuable on
the later of those days is not, except as provided by an order of the Board
made under subsection 78(3), prejudiced or diminished by reason only of that
country having become a WCT country.

Compensation

(2) Despite subsection (1), a person's right or interest that is protected by
that subsection terminates as against the copyright owner if and when that
owner pays the person any compensation that is agreed to between the parties
or, failing agreement, that is determined by the Board in accordance with
section 78.

# PART IV

# REMEDIES

## Civil Remedies

Copyright Infringement

**34. ** (1) Where copyright has been infringed, the owner of the copyright
is, subject to this Act, entitled to all remedies by way of injunction,
damages, accounts, delivery up and otherwise that are or may be conferred by
law for the infringement of a right.

Moral rights

(2) In any proceedings for an infringement of a moral right of an author, the
court may grant to the holder of those rights all remedies by way
of injunction, damages, accounts, delivery up and otherwise that are or may be
conferred by law for the infringement of a right.

Costs

(3) The costs of all parties in any proceedings in respect of the infringement
of a right conferred by this Act shall be in the discretion of the court.

Summary proceedings

(4) The following proceedings may be commenced or proceeded with by way of
application or action and shall, in the case of an application, be heard and
determined without delay and in a summary way:

(a) proceedings for infringement of copyright or moral rights;

(b) proceedings taken under section 44.1, 44.2 or 44.4; and

(c) proceedings taken in respect of

(i) a tariff certified by the Board under Part VII or VIII, or

(ii) agreements referred to in section 70.12.

Practice and procedure

(5) The rules of practice and procedure, in civil matters, of the court in
which proceedings are commenced by way of application apply to those
proceedings, but where those rules do not provide for the proceedings to be
heard and determined without delay and in a summary way, the court may give
such directions as it considers necessary in order to so provide.

Actions

(6) The court in which proceedings are instituted by way of application may,
where it considers it appropriate, direct that the proceeding be proceeded
with as an action.

Meaning of "application"

(7) In this section, "application" means a proceeding that is commenced other
than by way of a writ or statement of claim.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 34; R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 8; 1993, c. 15,
s. 3(E), c. 44, s. 65; 1994, c. 47, s. 62; 1997, c. 24, s. 20.

Presumptions respecting copyright and ownership

**34.1 ** (1) In any civil proceedings taken under this Act in which the
defendant puts in issue either the existence of the copyright or the title of
the plaintiff to it,

(a) copyright shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, to subsist in
the work, performer's performance, sound recording or communication signal, as
the case may be; and

(b) the author, performer, maker or broadcaster, as the case may be, shall,
unless the contrary is proved, be presumed to be the owner of the copyright.

Where no grant registered

(2) Where any matter referred to in subsection (1) is at issue and no
assignment of the copyright, or licence granting an interest in the copyright,
has been registered under this Act,

(a) if a name purporting to be that of

(i) the author of the work,

(ii) the performer of the performer's performance,

(iii) the maker of the sound recording, or

(iv) the broadcaster of the communication signal

is printed or otherwise indicated thereon in the usual manner, the person
whose name is so printed or indicated shall, unless the contrary is proved, be
presumed to be the author, performer, maker or broadcaster;

(b) if

(i) no name is so printed or indicated, or if the name so printed or indicated
is not the true name of the author, performer, maker or broadcaster or the
name by which that person is commonly known, and

(ii) a name purporting to be that of the publisher or owner of the work,
performer's performance, sound recording or communication signal is printed or
otherwise indicated thereon in the usual manner,

the person whose name is printed or indicated as described in subparagraph
(ii) shall, unless the contrary is proved, be presumed to be the owner of the
copyright in question; and

(c) if, on a cinematographic work, a name purporting to be that of the maker
of the cinematographic work appears in the usual manner, the person so named
shall, unless the contrary is proved, be presumed to be the maker of the
cinematographic work.

1997, c. 24, s. 20.

Liability for infringement

**35. ** (1) Where a person infringes copyright, the person is liable to pay
such damages to the owner of the copyright as the owner has suffered due to
the infringement and, in addition to those damages, such part of the profits
that the infringer has made from the infringement and that were not taken into
account in calculating the damages as the court considers just.

Proof of profits

(2) In proving profits,

(a) the plaintiff shall be required to prove only receipts or revenues derived
from the infringement; and

(b) the defendant shall be required to prove every element of cost that the
defendant claims.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 35; 1997, c. 24, s. 20.

**36. ** [Repealed, 2010, c. 32, s. 45]

**37. ** [Repealed, 2010, c. 32, s. 45]

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 37; 1997, c. 24, s. 20.

Recovery of possession of copies, plates

**38. ** (1) Subject to subsection (2), the owner of the copyright in a work
or other subject-matter may

(a) recover possession of all infringing copies of that work or other subject-
matter, and of all plates used or intended to be used for the production of
infringing copies, and

(b) take proceedings for seizure of those copies or plates before judgment if,
under the law of Canada or of the province in which those proceedings are
taken, a person is entitled to take such proceedings,

as if those copies or plates were the property of the copyright owner.

Powers of court

(2) On application by

(a) a person from whom the copyright owner has recovered possession of copies
or plates referred to in subsection (1),

(b) a person against whom proceedings for seizure before judgment of copies or
plates referred to in subsection (1) have been taken, or

(c) any other person who has an interest in those copies or plates,

a court may order that those copies or plates be destroyed, or may make any
other order that it considers appropriate in the circumstances.

Notice to interested persons

(3) Before making an order under subsection (2), the court shall direct that
notice be given to any person who has an interest in the copies or plates in
question, unless the court is of the opinion that the interests of justice do
not require such notice to be given.

Circumstances court to consider

(4) In making an order under subsection (2), the court shall have regard to
all the circumstances, including

(a) the proportion, importance and value of the infringing copy or plate, as
compared to the substrate or carrier embodying it; and

(b) the extent to which the infringing copy or plate is severable from, or a
distinct part of, the substrate or carrier embodying it.

Limitation

(5) Nothing in this Act entitles the copyright owner to damages in respect of
the possession or conversion of the infringing copies or plates.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 38; 1997, c. 24, s. 20.

Statutory damages

**38.1 ** (1) Subject to this section, a copyright owner may elect, at any
time before final judgment is rendered, to recover, instead of damages and
profits referred to in subsection 35(1), an award of statutory damages for all
infringements involved in the proceedings, with respect to any one work or
other subject-matter, for which any one infringer is liable individually, or
for which any two or more infringers are liable jointly and severally,

(a) in a sum of not less than $500 and not more than $20,000 that the court
considers just, with respect to all infringements involved in the proceedings
for each work or other subject-matter, if the infringements are for commercial
purposes; and

(b) in a sum of not less than $100 and not more than $5,000 that the court
considers just, with respect to all infringements involved in the proceedings
for all works or other subject-matter, if the infringements are for
non-commercial purposes.

Infringements not involved in the proceedings

(1.1) If the copyright owner has made an election under subsection (1) with
respect to a defendant's infringements that are for non-commercial purposes,
they are barred from recovering statutory damages under this section from that
defendant with respect to any other of the defendant's infringements that
were done for non-commercial purposes before the institution of the proceedings
in which the election was made.

No other statutory damages

(1.2) If a copyright owner has made an election under subsection (1) with
respect to a defendant's infringements that are for non-commercial purposes,
every other copyright owner is barred from electing to recover statutory
damages under this section in respect of that defendant for any of the
defendant's infringements that were done for non-commercial purposes before
the institution of the proceedings in which the election was made.

If defendant unaware of infringement

(2) If a copyright owner has made an election under subsection (1) and the
defendant satisfies the court that the defendant was not aware and had no
reasonable grounds to believe that the defendant had infringed copyright, the
court may reduce the amount of the award under paragraph (1)(a) to less than
$500, but not less than $200.

Special case

(3) In awarding statutory damages under paragraph (1)(a) or subsection (2), the
court may award, with respect to each work or other subject-matter, a lower
amount than $500 or $200, as the case may be, that the court considers just, if

(a) there is more than one work or other subject-matter in a single medium; and

(b) the awarding of even the minimum amount referred to in that paragraph or
that subsection would result in a total award that, in the court's opinion,
is grossly out of proportion to the infringement.

Collective societies

(4) Where the defendant has not paid applicable royalties, a collective
society referred to in section 67 may only make an election under this section
to recover, in lieu of any other remedy of a monetary nature provided by this
Act, an award of statutory damages in a sum of not less than three and not
more than ten times the amount of the applicable royalties, as the court
considers just.

Factors to consider

(5) In exercising its discretion under subsections (1) to (4), the court shall
consider all relevant factors, including

(a) the good faith or bad faith of the defendant;

(b) the conduct of the parties before and during the proceedings;

(c) the need to deter other infringements of the copyright in question; and

(d) in the case of infringements for non-commercial purposes, the need for an
award to be proportionate to the infringements, in consideration of the
hardship the award may cause to the defendant, whether the infringement was for
private purposes or not, and the impact of the infringements on the plaintiff.

No award

(6) No statutory damages may be awarded against

(a) an educational institution or a person acting under its authority that has
committed an act referred to in section 29.6 or 29.7 and has not paid any
royalties or complied with any terms and conditions fixed under this Act in
relation to the commission of the act;

(b) an educational institution, library, archive or museum that is sued in the
circumstances referred to in section 38.2;

(c) a person who infringes copyright under paragraph 27(2)(e) or section 27.1,
where the copy in question was made with the consent of the copyright owner in
the country where the copy was made;

(d) a person who infringes copyright under subsection 27(2.3); or

(e) an educational institution that is sued in the circumstances referred to in subsection 30.02(7) or a person acting under its authority who is sued in the circumstances referred to in subsection 30.02(8).

Exemplary or punitive damages not affected

(7) An election under subsection (1) does not affect any right that the
copyright owner may have to exemplary or punitive damages.

1997, c. 24, s. 20.

Maximum amount that may be recovered

**38.2 ** (1) An owner of copyright in a work who has not authorized a
collective society to authorize its reprographic reproduction may recover, in
proceedings against an educational institution, library, archive or museum
that has reproduced the work, a maximum amount equal to the amount of
royalties that would have been payable to the society in respect of the
reprographic reproduction, if it were authorized, either

(a) under any agreement entered into with the collective society; or

(b) under a tariff certified by the Board pursuant to section 70.15.

Agreements with more than one collective society

(2) Where agreements respecting reprographic reproduction have been signed
with more than one collective society or where more than one tariff applies or
where both agreements and tariffs apply, the maximum amount that the copyright
owner may recover is the largest amount of the royalties provided for in any
of those agreements or tariffs.

Application

(3) Subsections (1) and (2) apply only where

(a) the collective society is entitled to authorize, or the tariff provides
for the payment of royalties in respect of, the reprographic reproduction of
that category of work; and

(b) copying of that general nature and extent is covered by the agreement or
tariff.

1997, c. 24, s. 20.

Injunction only remedy when defendant not aware of copyright

**39. ** (1) Subject to subsection (2), in any proceedings for infringement of
copyright, the plaintiff is not entitled to any remedy other than an
injunction in respect of the infringement if the defendant proves that, at the
date of the infringement, the defendant was not aware and had no reasonable
ground for suspecting that copyright subsisted in the work or other subject-
matter in question.

Exception where copyright registered

(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if, at the date of the infringement, the
copyright was duly registered under this Act.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 39; 1997, c. 24, s. 20.

Wide injunction

**39.1 ** (1) When granting an injunction in respect of an infringement of
copyright in a work or other subject-matter, the court may further enjoin the
defendant from infringing the copyright in any other work or subject-matter if

(a) the plaintiff is the owner of the copyright or the person to whom an
interest in the copyright has been granted by licence; and

(b) the plaintiff satisfies the court that the defendant will likely infringe
the copyright in those other works or subject-matter unless enjoined by the
court from doing so.

Application of injunction

(2) An injunction granted under subsection (1) may extend to works or other
subject-matter

(a) in respect of which the plaintiff was not, at the time the proceedings
were commenced, the owner of the copyright or the person to whom an interest
in the copyright has been granted by licence; or

(b) that did not exist at the time the proceedings were commenced.

1997, c. 24, s. 20.

No injunction in case of a building

**40. ** (1) Where the construction of a building or other structure that
infringes or that, if completed, would infringe the copyright in some other
work has been commenced, the owner of the copyright is not entitled to obtain
an injunction in respect of the construction of that building or structure or
to order its demolition.

Certain remedies inapplicable

(2) Sections 38 and 42 do not apply in any case in respect of which subsection
(1) applies.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 40; 1997, c. 24, s. 21.

Technological Protection Measures and Rights Management Information

Definitions

**41. ** (1) The following definitions apply in this section and in sections
41.1 to 41.21.

"circumvent"

"circumvent" means,

(a) in respect of a technological protection measure within the meaning of
paragraph (a) of the definition "technological protection measure", to
descramble a scrambled work or decrypt an encrypted work or to otherwise avoid,
bypass, remove, deactivate or impair the technological protection measure,
unless it is done with the authority of the copyright owner; and

(b) in respect of a technological protection measure within the meaning of
paragraph (b) of the definition "technological protection measure", to avoid,
bypass, remove, deactivate or impair the technological protection measure.

"technological protection measure"

"technological protection measure" means any effective technology, device or
component that, in the ordinary course of its operation,

(a) controls access to a work, to a perform- er's performance fixed in a sound
recording or to a sound recording and whose use is authorized by the copyright
owner; or

(b) restricts the doing — with respect to a work, to a performer's
performance fixed in a sound recording or to a sound recording — of any act
referred to in section 3, 15 or 18 and any act for which remuneration is
payable under section 19.

Prohibition

**41.1 ** (1) No person shall

(a) circumvent a technological protection measure within the meaning of
paragraph (a) of the definition "technological protection measure" in section
41;

(b) offer services to the public or provide services if

(i) the services are offered or provided primarily for the purposes of
circumventing a technological protection measure,

(ii) the uses or purposes of those services are not commercially significant
other than when they are offered or provided for the purposes of circumventing
a technological protection measure, or

(iii) the person markets those services as being for the purposes of
circumventing a technological protection measure or acts in concert with
another person in order to market those services as being for those purposes; or

(c) manufacture, import, distribute, offer for sale or rental or provide —
including by selling or renting — any technology, device or component if

(i) the technology, device or component is designed or produced primarily for
the purposes of circumventing a technological protection measure,

(ii) the uses or purposes of the technology, device or component are not
commercially significant other than when it is used for the purposes of
circumventing a technological protection measure, or

(iii) the person markets the technology, device or component as being for the
purposes of circumventing a technological protection measure or acts in concert
with another person in order to market the technology, device or component as
being for those purposes.

Circumvention of technological protection measure

(2) The owner of the copyright in a work, a performer's performance fixed in a
sound recording or a sound recording in respect of which paragraph (1)(a) has
been contravened is, subject to this Act and any regulations made under section
41.21, entitled to all remedies — by way of injunction, damages, accounts,
delivery up and otherwise — that are or may be conferred by law for the
infringement of copyright against the person who contravened that paragraph.

No statutory damages

(3) The owner of the copyright in a work, a performer's performance fixed in a
sound recording or a sound recording in respect of which paragraph (1)(a) has
been contravened may not elect under section 38.1 to recover statutory damages
from an individual who contravened that paragraph only for his or her own
private purposes.

Services, technology, device or component

(4) Every owner of the copyright in a work, a performer's performance fixed in
a sound recording or a sound recording in respect of which a technological
protection measure has been or could be circumvented as a result of the
contravention of paragraph (1)(b) or (c) is, subject to this Act and any
regulations made under section 41.21, entitled to all remedies — by way of
injunction, damages, accounts, delivery up and otherwise — that are or may be
conferred by law for the infringement of copyright against the person who
contravened paragraph (1)(b) or (c).

Law enforcement and national security

**41.11 ** (1) Paragraph 41.1(1)(a) does not apply if a technological
protection measure is circumvented for the purposes of an investigation related
to the enforcement of any Act of Parliament or any Act of the legislature of a
province, or for the purposes of activities related to the protection of
national security.

Services

(2) Paragraph 41.1(1)(b) does not apply if the services are provided by or for
the persons responsible for carrying out such an investigation or such
activities.

Technology, device or component

(3) Paragraph 41.1(1)(c) does not apply if the technology, device or component
is manufactured, imported or provided by the persons responsible for carrying
out such an investigation or such activities, or is manufactured, imported,
provided or offered for sale or rental as a service provided to those persons.

Interoperability of computer programs

**41.12 ** (1) Paragraph 41.1(1)(a) does not apply to a person who owns a
computer program or a copy of one, or has a licence to use the program or copy,
and who circumvents a technological protection measure that protects that
program or copy for the sole purpose of obtaining information that would allow
the person to make the program and any other computer program interoperable.

Services

(2) Paragraph 41.1(1)(b) does not apply to a person who offers services to the
public or provides services for the purposes of circumventing a technological
protection measure if the person does so for the purpose of making the computer
program and any other computer program interoperable.

Technology, device or component

(3) Paragraph 41.1(1)(c) does not apply to a person who manufactures, imports
or provides a technology, device or component for the purposes of circumventing
a technological protection measure if the person does so for the purpose of
making the computer program and any other computer program interoperable and

(a) uses that technology, device or component only for that purpose; or

(b) provides that technology, device or component to another person only for
that purpose.

Sharing of information

(4) A person referred to in subsection (1) may communicate the information
obtained under that subsection to another person for the purposes of allowing
that person to make the computer program and any other computer program
interoperable.

Limitation

(5) A person to whom the technology, device or component referred to in
subsection (3) is provided or to whom the information referred to in subsection
(4) is communicated may use it only for the purpose of making the computer
program and any other computer program interoperable.

Non-application

(6) However, a person is not entitled to benefit from the exceptions under
subsections (1) to (3) or (5) if, for the purposes of making the computer
program and any other computer program interoperable, the person does an act
that constitutes an infringement of copyright.

Non-application

(7) Furthermore, a person is not entitled to benefit from the exception under
subsection (4) if, for the purposes of making the computer program and any
other computer program interoperable, the person does an act that constitutes
an infringement of copyright or an act that contravenes any Act of Parliament
or any Act of the legislature of a province.

Encryption research

41.13 (1) Paragraph 41.1(1)(a) does not apply to a person who, for the purposes
of encryption research, circumvents a technological protection measure by means
of decryption if

(a) it would not be practical to carry out the research without circumventing
the technological protection measure;

(b) the person has lawfully obtained the work, the performer's performance
fixed in a sound recording or the sound recording that is protected by the
technological protection measure; and

(c) the person has informed the owner of the copyright in the work, the
performer's performance fixed in a sound recording or the sound recording who
has applied the technological protection measure.

Non-application

(2) However, a person acting in the circumstances referred to in subsection (1)
is not entitled to benefit from the exception under that subsection if the
person does an act that constitutes an infringement of copyright or an act that
contravenes any Act of Parliament or any Act of the legislature of a province.

Technology, device or component

(3) Paragraph 41.1(1)(c) does not apply to a person referred to in subsection
(1) who manufactures a technology, device or component for the purposes of
circumventing a technological protection measure that is subject to paragraph
41.1(1)(a) if the person does so for the purpose of encryption research and

(a) uses that technology, device or component only for that purpose; or

(b) provides that technology, device or component only for that purpose to
another person who is collaborating with the person.

Personal information

**41.14 ** (1) Paragraph 41.1(1)(a) does not apply to a person who circumvents
a technolog- ical protection measure if

(a) the work, performer's performance fixed in a sound recording or sound
recording that is protected by the technological protection measure is not
accompanied by a notice indicating that its use will permit a third party to
collect and communicate personal information relating to the user or, in the
case where it is accompanied by such a notice, the user is not provided with
the option to prevent the collection and communication of personal information
without the user's use of it being restricted; and

(b) the only purpose of circumventing the technological protection measure is
to verify whether it permits the collection or communication of personal
information and, if it does, to prevent it.

Services, technology, device or component

(2) Paragraphs 41.1(1)(b) and (c) do not apply to a person who offers services
to the public or provides services, or manufactures, imports or provides a
technology, device or component, for the purposes of circumventing a
technological protection measure in accordance with subsection (1), to the
extent that the services, technology, device or component do not unduly impair
the technological protection measure.

Security

**41.15 ** (1) Paragraph 41.1(1)(a) does not apply to a person who circumvents
a technological protection measure that is subject to that paragraph for the
sole purpose of, with the consent of the owner or administrator of a computer,
computer system or computer network, assessing the vulnerability of the
computer, system or network or correcting any security flaws.

Services

(2) Paragraph 41.1(1)(b) does not apply if the services are provided to a
person described in subsection (1).

Technology, device or component

(3) Paragraph 41.1(1)(c) does not apply if the technology, device or component
is manufactured or imported by a person described in subsection (1), or is
manufactured, imported, provided — including by selling or renting —
offered for sale or rental or distributed as a service provided to that person.

Non-application

(4) A person acting in the circumstances referred to in subsection (1) is not
entitled to benefit from the exception under that subsection if the person does
an act that constitutes an infringement of copyright or an act that contravenes
any Act of Parliament or any Act of the legislature of a province.

Persons with perceptual disabilities

**41.16 ** (1) Paragraph 41.1(1)(a) does not apply to a person with a
perceptual disability, another person acting at their request or a non-profit
organization acting for their benefit if that person or organization
circumvents a technological protection measure for the sole purpose of making a
work, a performer's performance fixed in a sound recording or a sound recording
perceptible to the person with a perceptual disability.

Services, technology, device or component

(2) Paragraphs 41.1(1)(b) and (c) do not apply to a person who offers or
provides services to persons or organizations referred to in subsection (1), or
manufactures, imports or provides a technology, device or component, for the
purposes of enabling those persons or organizations to circumvent a
technological protection measure in accordance with that subsection, to the
extent that the services, technology, device or component do not unduly impair
the technological protection measure.

Broadcasting undertakings

**41.17 ** Paragraph 41.1(1)(a) does not apply to a broadcasting undertaking
that circumvents a technological protection measure for the sole purpose of
making an ephemeral reproduction of a work, a performer's performance fixed in
a sound recording or a sound recording in accordance with section 30.9, unless
the owner of the copyright in the work, the performer's performance fixed in a
sound recording or the sound recording that is protected by the technological
protection measure makes available the necessary means to enable the making of
such a reproduction in a timely manner in light of the broadcasting
undertaking's business requirements.

Radio apparatus

**41.18 ** (1) Paragraph 41.1(1)(a) does not apply to a person who circumvents
a technological protection measure on a radio apparatus for the sole purpose of
gaining access to a telecommunications service by means of the radio apparatus.

Services or technology, device or component

(2) Paragraphs 41.1(1)(b) and (c) do not apply to a person who offers the
services to the public or provides the services, or manufactures, imports or
provides the technology, device or component, for the sole purpose of
facilitating access to a telecommunications service by means of a radio
apparatus.

Definitions

(3) The following definitions apply in this section.

"radio apparatus"

"radio apparatus" has the same meaning as in section 2 of the
Radiocommunication Act.

"telecommunications service"

"telecommunications service" has the same meaning as in subsection 2(1) of the
Telecommunications Act.

Reduction of damages

**41.19 ** A court may reduce or remit the amount of damages it awards in the
circumstances described in subsection 41.1(1) if the defendant satisfies the
court that the defendant was not aware, and had no reasonable grounds to
believe, that the defendant's acts constituted a contravention of that
subsection.

Injunction only remedy

**41.2 ** If a court finds that a defendant that is a library, archive or
museum or an educational institution has contravened subsection 41.1(1) and the
defendant satisfies the court that it was not aware, and had no reasonable
grounds to believe, that its actions constituted a contravention of that
subsection, the plaintiff is not entitled to any remedy other than an
injunction.

Regulations

**41.21 ** (1) The Governor in Council may make regulations excluding from the
application of section 41.1 any technological protection measure that protects
a work, a performer's performance fixed in a sound recording or a sound
recording, or classes of them, or any class of such technological protection
measures, if the Governor in Council considers that the application of that
section to the technological protection measure or class of technological
protection measures would unduly restrict competition in the aftermarket sector
in which the technological protection measure is used.

Regulations

(2) The Governor in Council may make regulations

(a) prescribing additional circumstances in which paragraph 41.1(1)(a) does not
apply, having regard to the following factors:

(i) whether not being permitted to circumvent a technological protection
measure that is subject to that paragraph could adversely affect the use a
person may make of a work, a performer's performance fixed in a sound recording
or a sound recording when that use is authorized,

(ii) whether the work, the performer's performance fixed in a sound recording
or the sound recording is commercially available,

(iii) whether not being permitted to circumvent a technological protection
measure that is subject to that paragraph could adversely affect criticism,
review, news reporting, commentary, parody, satire, teaching, scholarship or
research that could be made or done in respect of the work, the performer's
performance fixed in a sound recording or the sound recording,

(iv) whether being permitted to circumvent a technological protection measure
that is subject to that paragraph could adversely affect the market for the
work, the performer's performance fixed in a sound recording or the sound
recording or its market value,

(v) whether the work, the performer's performance fixed in a sound recording or
the sound recording is commercially available in a medium and in a quality that
is appropriate for non-profit archival, preservation or educational uses, and

(vi) any other relevant factor; and

(b) requiring the owner of the copyright in a work, a performer's performance
fixed in a sound recording or a sound recording that is protected by a
technological protection measure to provide access to the work, performer's
performance fixed in a sound recording or sound recording to persons who are
entitled to the benefit of any of the limitations on the application of
paragraph 41.1(1)(a) prescribed under paragraph (a). The regulations may
prescribe the manner in which, and the time within which, access is to be
provided, as well as any conditions that the owner of the copyright is to
comply with.

Prohibition — rights management information

41.22 (1) No person shall knowingly remove or alter any rights management
information in electronic form without the consent of the owner of the
copyright in the work, the performer's performance or the sound recording, if
the person knows or should have known that the removal or alteration will
facilitate or conceal any infringement of the owner's copyright or adversely
affect the owner's right to remuneration under section 19.

Removal or alteration of rights management information

(2) The owner of the copyright in a work, a performer's performance fixed in a
sound recording or a sound recording is, subject to this Act, entitled to all
remedies — by way of injunction, damages, accounts, delivery up and otherwise
— that are or may be conferred by law for the infringement of copyright
against a person who contravenes subsection (1).

Subsequent acts

(3) The copyright owner referred to in subsection (2) has the same remedies
against a person who, without the owner's consent, knowingly does any of the
following acts with respect to any material form of the work, the performer's
performance fixed in a sound recording or the sound recording and knows or
should have known that the rights management information has been removed or
altered in a way that would give rise to a remedy under that subsection:

(a) sells it or rents it out;

(b) distributes it to an extent that the copyright owner is prejudicially
affected;

(c) by way of trade, distributes it, exposes or offers it for sale or rental or
exhibits it in public;

(d) imports it into Canada for the purpose of doing anything referred to in any
of paragraphs (a) to (c); or

(e) communicates it to the public by telecommunication.

Definition of "rights management information"

(4) In this section, "rights management information" means information that

(a) is attached to or embodied in a copy of a work, a performer's performance
fixed in a sound recording or a sound recording, or appears in connection with
its communication to the public by telecommunication; and

(b) identifies or permits the identification of the work or its author, the
performance or its performer, the sound recording or its maker or the holder of
any rights in the work, the performance or the sound recording, or concerns the
terms or conditions of the work's, performance's or sound recording's use.

General Provisions

Protection of separate rights

**41.23 ** (1) Subject to this section, the owner of any copyright, or any
person or persons deriving any right, title or interest by assignment or grant
in writing from the owner, may individually for himself or herself, as a party
to the proceedings in his or her own name, protect and enforce any right that
he or she holds, and, to the extent of that right, title and interest, is
entitled to the remedies provided by this Act.

Copyright owner to be made party

(2) If proceedings under subsection (1) are taken by a person other than the
copyright owner, the copyright owner shall be made a party to those
proceedings, except

(a) in the case of proceedings taken under section 44.1, 44.2 or 44.4;

(b) in the case of interlocutory proceedings, unless the court is of the
opinion that the interests of justice require the copyright owner to be a
party; and

(c) in any other case in which the court is of the opinion that the interests
of justice do not require the copyright owner to be a party.

Owner's liability for costs

(3) A copyright owner who is made a party to proceedings under subsection (2)
is not liable for any costs unless the copyright owner takes part in the
proceedings.

Apportionment of damages, profits

(4) If a copyright owner is made a party to proceedings under subsection (2),
the court, in awarding damages or profits, shall, subject to any agreement
between the person who took the proceedings and the copyright owner, apportion
the damages or profits referred to in subsection 35(1) between them as the
court considers appropriate.

Concurrent jurisdiction of Federal Court

**41.24 ** The Federal Court has concurrent jurisdiction with provincial courts
to hear and determine all proceedings, other than the prosecution of offences
under sections 42 and 43, for the enforcement of a provision of this Act or of
the civil remedies provided by this Act.

Provisions Respecting Providers of Network Services or Information Location
Tools

Notice of claimed infringement

**41.25 ** (1) An owner of the copyright in a work or other subject-matter may
send a notice of claimed infringement to a person who provides

(a) the means, in the course of providing services related to the operation of
the Internet or another digital network, of telecommunication through which the
electronic location that is the subject of the claim of infringement is
connected to the Internet or another digital network;

(b) for the purpose set out in subsection 31.1(5), the digital memory that is
used for the electronic location to which the claim of infringement relates; or

(c) an information location tool as defined in subsection 41.27(5).

Form and content of notice

(2) A notice of claimed infringement shall be in writing in the form, if any,
prescribed by regulation and shall

(a) state the claimant's name and address and any other particulars
prescribed by regulation that enable communication with the claimant;

(b) identify the work or other subject-matter to which the claimed infringement
relates;

(c) state the claimant's interest or right with respect to the copyright in
the work or other subject-matter;

(d) specify the location data for the electronic location to which the claimed
infringement relates;

(e) specify the infringement that is claimed;

(f) specify the date and time of the commission of the claimed infringement; and

(g) contain any other information that may be prescribed by regulation.

Obligations related to notice

**41.26 ** (1) A person described in paragraph 41.25(1)(a) or (b) who receives
a notice of claimed infringement that complies with subsection 41.25(2) shall,
on being paid any fee that the person has lawfully charged for doing so,

(a) without delay forward the notice elec- tronically to the person to whom the
electron- ic location identified by the location data specified in the notice
belongs and inform the claimant of its forwarding or, if applicable, of the
reason why it was not possible to forward it; and

(b) retain records that will allow the identity of the person to whom the
electronic location belongs to be determined, and do so for six months
beginning on the day on which the notice of claimed infringement is received
or, if the claimant commences proceedings relating to the claimed infringement
and so notifies the person before the end of those six months, for one year
after the day on which the person receives the notice of claimed infringement.

Fees related to notices

(2) The Minister may, by regulation, fix the maximum fee that a person may
charge for performing his or her obligations under subsection (1). If no
maximum is fixed by regulation, the person may not charge any amount under that
subsection.

Damages related to notices

(3) A claimant's only remedy against a person who fails to perform his or her
obligations under subsection (1) is statutory damages in an amount that the
court considers just, but not less than $5,000 and not more than $10,000.

Regulations — change of amounts

(4) The Governor in Council may, by regulation, increase or decrease the
minimum or maximum amount of statutory damages set out in subsection (3).

Injunctive relief only — providers of information location tools

**41.27 ** (1) In any proceedings for infringement of copyright, the owner of
the copyright in a work or other subject-matter is not entitled to any remedy
other than an injunction against a provider of an information location tool
that is found to have infringed copyright by making a reproduction of the work
or other subject-matter or by communicating that reproduction to the public by
telecommunication.

Conditions for application

(2) Subsection (1) applies only if the provid- er, in respect of the work or
other subject-matter,

(a) makes and caches, or does any act similar to caching, the reproduction in
an automated manner for the purpose of providing the information location tool;

(b) communicates that reproduction to the public by telecommunication for the
purpose of providing the information that has been located by the information
location tool;

(c) does not modify the reproduction, other than for technical reasons;

(d) complies with any conditions relating to the making or caching, or doing of
any act similar to caching, of reproductions of the work or other
subject-matter, or to the communication of the reproductions to the public by
telecommunication, that were established by whoever made the work or other
subject-matter available through the Internet or another digital network and
that lend themselves to automated reading and execution; and

(e) does not interfere with the lawful use of technology to obtain data on the
use of the work or other subject-matter.

Limitation

(3) If the provider receives a notice of claimed infringement, relating to a
work or other subject-matter, that complies with subsection 41.25(2) after the
work or other subject-matter has been removed from the electronic location set
out in the notice, then subsection (1) applies, with respect to reproductions
made from that electronic location, only to infringements that occurred before
the day that is 30 days — or the period that may be prescribed by regulation
— after the day on which the provider receives the notice.

Exception

(4) Subsection (1) does not apply to the provision of the information location
tool if the provision of that tool constitutes an infringement of copyright
under subsection 27(2.3).

Meaning of "information location tool"

(5) In this section, "information location tool" means any tool that makes
it possible to locate information that is available through the Internet or
another digital network.

## Criminal Remedies

Offences and punishment

**42. ** (1) Every person who knowingly

(a) makes for sale or rental an infringing copy of a work or other subject-
matter in which copyright subsists,

(b) sells or rents out, or by way of trade exposes or offers for sale or
rental, an infringing copy of a work or other subject-matter in which
copyright subsists,

(c) distributes infringing copies of a work or other subject-matter in which
copyright subsists, either for the purpose of trade or to such an extent as to
affect prejudicially the owner of the copyright,

(d) by way of trade exhibits in public an infringing copy of a work or other
subject-matter in which copyright subsists, or

(e) imports for sale or rental into Canada any infringing copy of a work or
other subject-matter in which copyright subsists

is guilty of an offence and liable

(f) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding twenty-five thousand
dollars or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to both, or

(g) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding one million dollars
or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to both.

Possession and performance offences and punishment

(2) Every person who knowingly

(a) makes or possesses any plate that is specifically designed or adapted for
the purpose of making infringing copies of any work or other subject-matter in
which copyright subsists, or

(b) for private profit causes to be performed in public, without the consent
of the owner of the copyright, any work or other subject-matter in which
copyright subsists

is guilty of an offence and liable

(c) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding twenty-five thousand
dollars or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to both, or

(d) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding one million dollars
or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to both.

Power of court to deal with copies or plates

(3) The court before which any proceedings under this section are taken may,
on conviction, order that all copies of the work or other subject-matter that
appear to it to be infringing copies, or all plates in the possession of the
offender predominantly used for making infringing copies, be destroyed or
delivered up to the owner of the copyright or otherwise dealt with as the
court may think fit.

Circumvention of technological protection measure

(3.1) Every person, except a person who is acting on behalf of a library,
archive or museum or an educational institution, is guilty of an offence who
knowingly and for commercial purposes contravenes section 41.1 and is liable

(a) on conviction on indictment, to a fine not exceeding $1,000,000 or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years or to both; or

(b) on summary conviction, to a fine not exceeding $25,000 or to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding six months or to both.

Limitation period

(4) Proceedings by summary conviction in respect of an offence under this
section may be instituted at any time within, but not later than, two years
after the time when the offence was committed.

Parallel importation of books

(5) No person may be prosecuted under this section for importing a book or
dealing with an imported book in the manner described in section 27.1.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 42; R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 10; 1997, c. 24,
s. 24.

Infringement in case of dramatic, operatic or musical work

**43. ** (1) Any person who, without the written consent of the owner of the
copyright or of the legal representative of the owner, knowingly performs or
causes to be performed in public and for private profit the whole or any part,
constituting an infringement, of any dramatic or operatic work or musical
composition in which copyright subsists in Canada is guilty of an offence and
liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding two hundred and fifty
dollars and, in the case of a second or subsequent offence, either to that
fine or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding two months or to both.

Change or suppression of title or author's name

(2) Any person who makes or causes to be made any change in or suppression of
the title, or the name of the author, of any dramatic or operatic work or
musical composition in which copyright subsists in Canada, or who makes or
causes to be made any change in the work or composition itself without the
written consent of the author or of his legal representative, in order that
the work or composition may be performed in whole or in part in public for
private profit, is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction to a
fine not exceeding five hundred dollars and, in the case of a second or
subsequent offence, either to that fine or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding four months or to both.

R.S., c. C-30, s. 26.

Limitation or Prescription Period

Limitation or prescription period for civil remedies

**43.1 ** (1) Subject to subsection (2), a court may award a remedy for any act
or omission that has been done contrary to this Act only if

(a) the proceedings for the act or omission giving rise to a remedy are
commenced within three years after it occurred, in the case where the plaintiff
knew, or could reasonably have been expected to know, of the act or omission at
the time it occurred; or

(b) the proceedings for the act or omission giving rise to a remedy are
commenced within three years after the time when the plaintiff first knew of
it, or could reasonably have been expected to know of it, in the case where the
plaintiff did not know, and could not reasonably have been expected to know, of
the act or omission at the time it occurred.

Restriction

(2) The court shall apply the limitation or prescription period set out in
paragraph (1)(a) or (b) only in respect of a party who pleads a limitation
period.

## Importation

Importation of certain copyright works prohibited

**44. ** Copies made out of Canada of any work in which copyright subsists
that if made in Canada would infringe copyright and as to which the owner of
the copyright gives notice in writing to the Canada Border Services Agency
that the owner desires that the copies not be so imported into Canada, shall
not be so imported and are deemed to be included in tariff item No. 9897.00.00
in the List of Tariff Provisions set out in the schedule to the _Customs
Tariff_, and section 136 of that Act applies accordingly.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 44; R.S., 1985, c. 41 (3rd Supp.), s. 116; 1997, c.
36, s. 205; 1999, c. 17, s. 119; 2005, c. 38, s. 139.

Definitions

**44.1 ** (1) In this section and sections 44.2 and 44.3,


"court"

"court" means the Federal Court or the superior court of a province;


"duties"

"duties" has the same meaning as in the _Customs Act_;


"Minister"

"Minister" means the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness;


"release"

"release" has the same meaning as in the _Customs Act_.

Power of court

(2) A court may make an order described in subsection (3) where the court is
satisfied that

(a) copies of the work are about to be imported into Canada, or have been
imported into Canada but have not yet been released;

(b) either

(i) copies of the work were made without the consent of the person who then
owned the copyright in the country where the copies were made, or

(ii) the copies were made elsewhere than in a country to which this Act
extends; and

(c) the copies would infringe copyright if they were made in Canada by the
importer and the importer knows or should have known this.

Who may apply

(2.1) A court may make an order described in subsection (3) on application by
the owner or exclusive licensee of copyright in a work in Canada.

Order of court

(3) The order referred to in subsection (2) is an order

(a) directing the Minister

(i) to take reasonable measures, on the basis of information reasonably
required by the Minister and provided by the applicant, to detain the work,
and

(ii) to notify the applicant and the importer, forthwith after detaining the
work, of the detention and the reasons therefor; and

(b) providing for such other matters as the court considers appropriate.

How application made

(4) An application for an order made under subsection (2) may be made in an
action or otherwise, and either on notice or ex parte, except that it must
always be made on notice to the Minister.

Court may require security

(5) Before making an order under subsection (2), the court may require the
applicant to furnish security, in an amount fixed by the court,

(a) to cover duties, storage and handling charges, and any other amount that
may become chargeable against the work; and

(b) to answer any damages that may by reason of the order be incurred by the
owner, importer or consignee of the work.

Application for directions

(6) The Minister may apply to the court for directions in implementing an
order made under subsection (2).

Minister may allow inspection

(7) The Minister may give the applicant or the importer an opportunity to
inspect the detained work for the purpose of substantiating or refuting, as
the case may be, the applicant's claim.

Where applicant fails to commence an action

(8) Unless an order made under subsection (2) provides otherwise, the Minister
shall, subject to the _Customs Act_ and to any other Act of Parliament that
prohibits, controls or regulates the importation or exportation of goods,
release the copies of the work without further notice to the applicant if, two
weeks after the applicant has been notified under subparagraph (3)(a)(ii), the
applicant has not notified the Minister that the applicant has commenced a
proceeding for a final determination by the court of the issues referred to in
paragraphs (2)(b) and (c).

Where court finds in plaintiff's favour

(9) Where, in a proceeding commenced under this section, the court finds that
the circumstances referred to in paragraphs (2)(b) and (c) existed, the court
may make any order that it considers appropriate in the circumstances,
including an order that the copies of the work be destroyed, or that they be
delivered up to the plaintiff as the plaintiff's property absolutely.

Other remedies not affected

(10) For greater certainty, nothing in this section affects any remedy
available under any other provision of this Act or any other Act of
Parliament.

1993, c. 44, s. 66; 1997, c. 24, s. 27; 2005, c. 38, ss. 142, 145.

Importation of books

**44.2 ** (1) A court may, subject to this section, make an order described in
subsection 44.1(3) in relation to a book where the court is satisfied that

(a) copies of the book are about to be imported into Canada, or have been
imported into Canada but have not yet been released;

(b) copies of the book were made with the consent of the owner of the
copyright in the book in the country where the copies were made, but were
imported without the consent of the owner in Canada of the copyright in the
book; and

(c) the copies would infringe copyright if they were made in Canada by the
importer and the importer knows or should have known this.

Who may apply

(2) A court may make an order described in subsection 44.1(3) in relation to a
book on application by

(a) the owner of the copyright in the book in Canada;

(b) the exclusive licensee of the copyright in the book in Canada; or

(c) the exclusive distributor of the book.

Limitation

(3) Subsections (1) and (2) only apply where there is an exclusive distributor
of the book and the acts described in those subsections take place in the part
of Canada or in respect of the particular sector of the market for which the
person is the exclusive distributor.

Application of certain provisions

(4) Subsections 44.1(3) to (10) apply, with such modifications as the
circumstances require, in respect of an order made under subsection (1).

1994, c. 47, s. 66; 1997, c. 24, s. 28.

Limitation

**44.3 ** No exclusive licensee of the copyright in a book in Canada, and no
exclusive distributor of a book, may obtain an order under section 44.2
against another exclusive licensee of the copyright in that book in Canada or
against another exclusive distributor of that book.

1997, c. 24, s. 28.

Importation of other subject-matter

**44.4 ** Section 44.1 applies, with such modifications as the circumstances
require, in respect of a sound recording, performer's performance or
communication signal, where a fixation or a reproduction of a fixation of it

(a) is about to be imported into Canada, or has been imported into Canada but
has not yet been released;

(b) either

(i) was made without the consent of the person who then owned the copyright in
the sound recording, performer's performance or communication signal, as the
case may be, in the country where the fixation or reproduction was made, or

(ii) was made elsewhere than in a country to which Part II extends; and

(c) would infringe the right of the owner of copyright in the sound recording,
performer's performance or communication signal if it was made in Canada by
the importer and the importer knows or should have known this.

1997, c. 24, s. 28.

Exceptions

**45. ** (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, it is lawful for a person

(a) to import for their own use not more than two copies of a work or other
subject-matter made with the consent of the owner of the copyright in the
country where it was made;

(b) to import for use by a department of the Government of Canada or a
province copies of a work or other subject-matter made with the consent of the
owner of the copyright in the country where it was made;

(c) at any time before copies of a work or other subject-matter are made in
Canada, to import any copies, except copies of a book, made with the consent
of the owner of the copyright in the country where the copies were made, that
are required for the use of a library, archive, museum or educational
institution;

(d) to import, for the use of a library, archive, museum or educational
institution, not more than one copy of a book that is made with the consent of
the owner of the copyright in the country where the book was made; and

(e) to import copies, made with the consent of the owner of the copyright in
the country where they were made, of any used books, except textbooks of a
scientific, technical or scholarly nature for use within an educational
institution in a course of instruction.

Satisfactory evidence

(2) An officer of customs may, in the officer's discretion, require a person
seeking to import a copy of a work or other subject-matter under this section
to produce satisfactory evidence of the facts necessary to establish the
person's right to import the copy.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 45; R.S., 1985, c. 41 (3rd Supp.), s. 117; 1993, c.
44, s. 67; 1994, c. 47, s. 67; 1997, c. 24, s. 28.

# PART V

# ADMINISTRATION

## Copyright Office

Copyright Office

**46. ** The Copyright Office shall be attached to the Patent Office.

R.S., c. C-30, s. 29.

Powers of Commissioner and Registrar

**47. ** The Commissioner of Patents shall exercise the powers conferred and
perform the duties imposed on him by this Act under the direction of the
Minister, and, in the absence of the Commissioner of Patents or if the
Commissioner is unable to act, the Registrar of Copyrights or other officer
temporarily appointed by the Minister may, as Acting Commissioner, exercise
those powers and perform those duties under the direction of the Minister.

R.S., c. C-30, s. 30.

Registrar

**48. ** There shall be a Registrar of Copyrights.

R.S., c. C-30, s. 31.

Register of Copyrights, certificates and certified copies

**49. ** The Commissioner of Patents, the Registrar of Copyrights or an
officer, clerk or employee of the Copyright Office may sign certificates and
certified copies of the Register of Copyrights.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 49; 1992, c. 1, s. 47; 1993, c. 15, s. 4.

Other duties of Registrar

**50. ** The Registrar of Copyrights shall perform such other duties in
connection with the administration of this Act as may be assigned to him by
the Commissioner of Patents.

R.S., c. C-30, s. 33.

**51. ** [Repealed, 1992, c. 1, s. 48]

Control of business and officials

**52. ** The Commissioner of Patents shall, subject to the Minister, oversee
and direct the officers, clerks and employees of the Copyright Office, have
general control of the business thereof and perform such other duties as are
assigned to him by the Governor in Council.

R.S., c. C-30, s. 35.

Register to be evidence

**53. ** (1) The Register of Copyrights is evidence of the particulars entered
in it, and a copy of an entry in the Register is evidence of the particulars
of the entry if it is certified by the Commissioner of Patents, the Registrar
of Copyrights or an officer, clerk or employee of the Copyright Office as a
true copy.

Owner of copyright

(2) A certificate of registration of copyright is evidence that the copyright
subsists and that the person registered is the owner of the copyright.

Assignee

(2.1) A certificate of registration of an assignment of copyright is evidence
that the right recorded on the certificate has been assigned and that the
assignee registered is the owner of that right.

Licensee

(2.2) A certificate of registration of a licence granting an interest in a
copyright is evidence that the interest recorded on the certificate has been
granted and that the licensee registered is the holder of that interest.

Admissibility

(3) A certified copy or certificate appearing to have been issued under this
section is admissible in all courts without proof of the signature or official
character of the person appearing to have signed it.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 53; 1992, c. 1, s. 49; 1993, c. 15, s. 5; 1997, c. 24,
s. 30.

## Registration

Register of Copyrights

**54. ** (1) The Minister shall cause to be kept at the Copyright Office a
register to be called the Register of Copyrights in which may be entered

(a) the names or titles of works and of other subject-matter in which
copyright subsists;

(b) the names and addresses of authors, performers, makers of sound
recordings, broadcasters, owners of copyright, assignees of copyright, and
persons to whom an interest in copyright has been granted by licence; and

(c) such other particulars as may be prescribed by regulation.

(2) [Repealed, 1997, c. 24, s. 31]

Single entry sufficient

(3) In the case of an encyclopaedia, newspaper, review, magazine or other
periodical work, or work published in a series of books or parts, it is not
necessary to make a separate entry for each number or part, but a single entry
for the whole work is sufficient.

Indices

(4) There shall also be kept at the Copyright Office such indices of the
Register established under this section as may be prescribed by regulation.

Inspection and extracts

(5) The Register and indices established under this section shall at all
reasonable times be open to inspection, and any person is entitled to make
copies of or take extracts from the Register.

Former registration effective

(6) Any registration made under the _Copyright Act_, chapter 70 of the Revised
Statutes of Canada, 1906, has the same force and effect as if made under this
Act.

Subsisting copyright

(7) Any work in which copyright, operative in Canada, subsisted immediately
before January 1, 1924 is registrable under this Act.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 54; 1992, c. 1, s. 50; 1997, c. 24, s. 31.

Copyright in works

**55. ** (1) Application for the registration of a copyright in a work may be
made by or on behalf of the author of the work, the owner of the copyright in
the work, an assignee of the copyright, or a person to whom an interest in the
copyright has been granted by licence.

Application for registration

(2) An application under subsection (1) must be filed with the Copyright
Office, be accompanied by the fee prescribed by or determined under the
regulations, and contain the following information:

(a) the name and address of the owner of the copyright in the work;

(b) a declaration that the applicant is the author of the work, the owner of
the copyright in the work, an assignee of the copyright, or a person to whom
an interest in the copyright has been granted by licence;

(c) the category of the work;

(d) the title of the work;

(e) the name of the author and, if the author is dead, the date of the
author's death, if known;

(f) in the case of a published work, the date and place of the first
publication; and

(g) any additional information prescribed by regulation.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 55; 1997, c. 24, s. 32.

Copyright in subject-matter other than works

**56. ** (1) Application for the registration of a copyright in subject-matter
other than a work may be made by or on behalf of the owner of the copyright in
the subject-matter, an assignee of the copyright, or a person to whom an
interest in the copyright has been granted by licence.

Application for registration

(2) An application under subsection (1) must be filed with the Copyright
Office, be accompanied by the fee prescribed by or determined under the
regulations, and contain the following information:

(a) the name and address of the owner of the copyright in the subject-matter;

(b) a declaration that the applicant is the owner of the copyright in the
subject-matter, an assignee of the copyright, or a person to whom an interest
in the copyright has been granted by licence;

(c) whether the subject-matter is a performer's performance, a sound recording
or a communication signal;

(d) the title, if any, of the subject-matter;

(e) the date of

(i) in the case of a performer's performance, its first fixation in a sound
recording or, if it is not fixed in a sound recording, its first performance,

(ii) in the case of a sound recording, the first fixation, or

(iii) in the case of a communication signal, its broadcast; and

(f) any additional information prescribed by regulation.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 56; 1993, c. 15, s. 6; 1997, c. 24, s. 32.

Recovery of damages

**56.1 ** Where a person purports to have the authority to apply for the
registration of a copyright under section 55 or 56 on behalf of another
person, any damage caused by a fraudulent or erroneous assumption of such
authority is recoverable in any court of competent jurisdiction.

1997, c. 24, s. 32.

Registration of assignment or licence

**57. ** (1) The Registrar of Copyrights shall register an assignment of
copyright, or a licence granting an interest in a copyright, on being
furnished with

(a) the original instrument or a certified copy of it, or other evidence
satisfactory to the Registrar of the assignment or licence; and

(b) the fee prescribed by or determined under the regulations.

(2) [Repealed, 1992, c. 1, s. 51]

When assignment or licence is void

(3) Any assignment of copyright, or any licence granting an interest in a
copyright, shall be adjudged void against any subsequent assignee or licensee
for valuable consideration without actual notice, unless the prior assignment
or licence is registered in the manner prescribed by this Act before the
registering of the instrument under which the subsequent assignee or licensee
claims.

Rectification of Register by the Court

(4) The Federal Court may, on application of the Registrar of Copyrights or of
any interested person, order the rectification of the Register of Copyrights
by

(a) the making of any entry wrongly omitted to be made in the Register,

(b) the expunging of any entry wrongly made in or remaining on the Register,
or

(c) the correction of any error or defect in the Register,

and any rectification of the Register under this subsection shall be
retroactive from such date as the Court may order.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 57; 1992, c. 1, s. 51; 1993, c. 15, s. 7; 1997, c. 24,
s. 33.

Execution of instruments

**58. ** (1) Any assignment of a copyright, or any licence granting an interest
in a copyright, may be executed, subscribed or acknowledged at any place in a
treaty country, a Rome Convention country or a WPPT country by the assignor,
licensor or secured or hypothecary debtor, before any notary public,
commissioner or other official, or the judge of any court, who is authorized by
law to administer oaths or certify documents in that place and who also
subscribes their signature and affixes to, or impresses on, the assignment or
licence their official seal or the seal of the court of which they are a judge.

Execution of instruments

(2) Any assignment of copyright, or any licence granting an interest in a
copyright, may be executed, subscribed or acknowledged by the assignor,
licensor or mortgagor, in any other foreign country before any notary public,
commissioner or other official or the judge of any court of the foreign
country, who is authorized to administer oaths or perform notarial acts in
that foreign country and whose authority shall be proved by the certificate of
a diplomatic or consular officer of Canada performing their functions in that
foreign country.

Seals to be evidence

(3) The official seal or seal of the court or the certificate of a diplomatic
or consular officer is evidence of the execution of the instrument, and the
instrument with the seal or certificate affixed or attached thereto is
admissible as evidence in any action or proceeding brought under this Act
without further proof.

Other testimony

(4) The provisions of subsections (1) and (2) shall be deemed to be permissive
only, and the execution of any assignment of copyright, or any licence
granting an interest in a copyright, may in any case be proved in accordance
with the applicable rules of evidence.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 58; 1997, c. 24, s. 34.

## Fees

Fees regulations

**59. ** The Governor in Council may make regulations

(a) prescribing fees, or the manner of determining fees, to be paid for
anything required or authorized to be done in the administration of this Act;
and

(b) prescribing the time and manner in which the fees must be paid.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 59; 1993, c. 15, s. 8.

# PART VI

# MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

## Substituted Right

Subsistence of substituted right

**60. ** (1) Where any person is immediately before January 1, 1924 entitled
to any right in any work that is set out in column I of Schedule I, or to any
interest in such a right, he is, as from that date, entitled to the
substituted right set out in column II of that Schedule, or to the same
interest in the substituted right, and to no other right or interest, and the
substituted right shall subsist for the term for which it would have subsisted
if this Act had been in force at the date when the work was made, and the work
had been one entitled to copyright thereunder.

Where author has assigned the right

(2) Where the author of any work in which any right that is set out in column
I of Schedule I subsists on January 1, 1924 has, before that date, assigned
the right or granted any interest therein for the whole term of the right,
then at the date when, but for the passing of this Act, the right would have
expired, the substituted right conferred by this section shall, in the absence
of express agreement, pass to the author of the work, and any interest therein
created before January 1, 1924 and then subsisting shall determine, but the
person who immediately before the date at which the right would have expired
was the owner of the right or interest is entitled at his option either

(a) on giving such notice as is hereinafter mentioned, to an assignment of the
right or the grant of a similar interest therein for the remainder of the term
of the right for such consideration as, failing agreement, may be determined
by arbitration, or

(b) without any assignment or grant, to continue to reproduce or perform the
work in like manner as theretofore subject to the payment, if demanded by the
author within three years after the date at which the right would have
expired, of such royalties to the author as, failing agreement, may be
determined by arbitration, or, where the work is incorporated in a collective
work and the owner of the right or interest is the proprietor of that
collective work, without any payment,

and the notice referred to in paragraph (a) must be given not more than one
year or less than six months before the date at which the right would have
expired, and must be sent by registered post to the author, or, if he cannot
with reasonable diligence be found, advertised in the _Canada Gazette_.

Definition of "author"

(3) For the purposes of this section, "author" includes the legal
representatives of a deceased author.

Works made before this Act in force

(4) Subject to this Act, copyright shall not subsist in any work made before
January 1, 1924 otherwise than under and in accordance with the provisions of
this section.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 60; R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 17(F); 1997, c.
24, s. 52(F).

## Clerical Errors

Clerical errors do not invalidate

**61. ** Clerical errors in any instrument of record in the Copyright Office
do not invalidate the instrument, but they may be corrected under the
authority of the Registrar of Copyrights.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 61; 1992, c. 1, s. 52; 1993, c. 15, s. 10.

## Regulations

Regulations

**62. ** (1) The Governor in Council may make regulations

(a) for the purposes of paragraph 30.01(6)(d), respecting measures, which may
vary according to circumstances specified in the regulations;

(b) for the purposes of paragraph 30.02(3)(d), respecting measures, which may
vary according to circumstances specified in the regulations;

(c) prescribing the form of a notice of claimed infringement referred to in
subsection 41.25(2) and prescribing information to be contained in it;

(d) prescribing anything that by this Act is to be prescribed by regulation; and

(e) generally for carrying out the purposes and provisions of this Act.

Rights saved

(2) The Governor in Council may make orders for altering, revoking or varying
any order in council made under this Act, but any order made under this
section does not affect prejudicially any rights or interests acquired or
accrued at the date when the order comes into operation, and shall provide for
the protection of those rights and interests.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 62; 1997, c. 24, s. 37.

## Industrial Designs and Topographies

**63. ** [Repealed, 1997, c. 24, s. 38]

Interpretation

**64. ** (1) In this section and section 64.1,


"article"

"article" means any thing that is made by hand, tool or machine;


"design"

"design" means features of shape, configuration, pattern or ornament and any
combination of those features that, in a finished article, appeal to and are
judged solely by the eye;


"useful article"

"useful article" means an article that has a utilitarian function and includes
a model of any such article;


"utilitarian function"

"utilitarian function", in respect of an article, means a function other than
merely serving as a substrate or carrier for artistic or literary matter.

Non-infringement re certain designs

(2) Where copyright subsists in a design applied to a useful article or in an
artistic work from which the design is derived and, by or under the authority
of any person who owns the copyright in Canada or who owns the copyright
elsewhere,

(a) the article is reproduced in a quantity of more than fifty, or

(b) where the article is a plate, engraving or cast, the article is used for
producing more than fifty useful articles,

it shall not thereafter be an infringement of the copyright or the moral
rights for anyone

(c) to reproduce the design of the article or a design not differing
substantially from the design of the article by

(i) making the article, or

(ii) making a drawing or other reproduction in any material form of the
article, or

(d) to do with an article, drawing or reproduction that is made as described
in paragraph (c) anything that the owner of the copyright has the sole right
to do with the design or artistic work in which the copyright subsists.

Exception

(3) Subsection (2) does not apply in respect of the copyright or the moral
rights in an artistic work in so far as the work is used as or for

(a) a graphic or photographic representation that is applied to the face of an
article;

(b) a trade-mark or a representation thereof or a label;

(c) material that has a woven or knitted pattern or that is suitable for piece
goods or surface coverings or for making wearing apparel;

(d) an architectural work that is a building or a model of a building;

(e) a representation of a real or fictitious being, event or place that is
applied to an article as a feature of shape, configuration, pattern or
ornament;

(f) articles that are sold as a set, unless more than fifty sets are made; or

(g) such other work or article as may be prescribed by regulation.

Idem

(4) Subsections (2) and (3) apply only in respect of designs created after the
coming into force of this subsection, and section 64 of this Act and the
_Industrial Design Act_, as they read immediately before the coming into force
of this subsection, as well as the rules made under them, continue to apply in
respect of designs created before that coming into force.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 64; R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 11; 1993, c. 44,
s. 68; 1997, c. 24, s. 39.

Non-infringement re useful article features

**64.1 ** (1) The following acts do not constitute an infringement of the
copyright or moral rights in a work:

(a) applying to a useful article features that are dictated solely by a
utilitarian function of the article;

(b) by reference solely to a useful article, making a drawing or other
reproduction in any material form of any features of the article that are
dictated solely by a utilitarian function of the article;

(c) doing with a useful article having only features described in paragraph
(a), or with a drawing or reproduction made as described in paragraph (b),
anything that the owner of the copyright has the sole right to do with the
work; and

(d) using any method or principle of manufacture or construction.

Exception

(2) Nothing in subsection (1) affects

(a) the copyright, or

(b) the moral rights, if any,

in any sound recording, cinematograph film or other contrivance by means of
which a work may be mechanically reproduced or performed.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 11; 1997, c. 24, s. 40.

Application of Act to topographies

**64.2 ** (1) This Act does not apply, and shall be deemed never to have
applied, to any topography or to any design, however expressed, that is
intended to generate all or part of a topography.

Computer programs

(2) For greater certainty, the incorporation of a computer program into an
integrated circuit product or the incorporation of a work into such a computer
program may constitute an infringement of the copyright or moral rights in a
work.

Definitions

(3) In this section, "topography" and "integrated circuit product" have the
same meaning as in the _Integrated Circuit Topography Act_.

1990, c. 37, s. 33.

**65. ** [Repealed, 1993, c. 44, s. 69]

# PART VII

# COPYRIGHT BOARD AND COLLECTIVE ADMINISTRATION OF COPYRIGHT

## Copyright Board

Establishment

**66. ** (1) There is hereby established a Board, to be known as the Copyright
Board, consisting of not more than five members, including a chairman and a
vice-chairman, to be appointed by the Governor in Council.

Service

(2) The members of the Board shall be appointed to serve either full-time or
part-time.

Chairman

(3) The chairman must be a judge, either sitting or retired, of a superior,
county or district court.

Tenure

(4) Each member of the Board shall hold office during good behaviour for a
term not exceeding five years, but may be removed at any time by the Governor
in Council for cause.

Re-appointment

(5) A member of the Board is eligible to be re-appointed once only.

Prohibition

(6) A member of the Board shall not be employed in the public service within
the meaning of the _Public Service Labour Relations Act_ during the member's
term of office.

Members deemed public service employees

(7) A full-time member of the Board, other than the chairman, shall be deemed
to be employed in

(a) the public service for the purposes of the _Public Service Superannuation
Act_; and

(b) the federal public administration for the purposes of any regulations made
pursuant to section 9 of the _Aeronautics Act_.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 66; R.S., 1985, c. 10 (1st Supp.), s. 1, c. 10 (4th
Supp.), s. 12; 2003, c. 22, s. 154(E), 224(E), 225(E).

Duties of chairman

**66.1 ** (1) The chairman shall direct the work of the Board and apportion
its work among the members of the Board.

Absence or incapacity of chairman

(2) If the chairman is absent or incapacitated or if the office of chairman is
vacant, the vice-chairman has all the powers and functions of the chairman
during the absence, incapacity or vacancy.

Duties of vice-chairman

(3) The vice-chairman is the chief executive officer of the Board and has
supervision over and direction of the Board and its staff.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 12.

Remuneration and expenses

**66.2 ** The members of the Board shall be paid such remuneration as may be
fixed by the Governor in Council and are entitled to be paid reasonable travel
and living expenses incurred by them in the course of their duties under this
Act while absent from their ordinary place of residence.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 12.

Conflict of interest prohibited

**66.3 ** (1) A member of the Board shall not, directly or indirectly, engage
in any activity, have any interest in a business or accept or engage in any
office or employment that is inconsistent with the member's duties.

Termination of conflict of interest

(2) Where a member of the Board becomes aware that he is in a conflict of
interest contrary to subsection (1), the member shall, within one hundred and
twenty days, terminate the conflict or resign.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 12.

Staff

**66.4 ** (1) Such officers and employees as are necessary for the proper
conduct of the work of the Board shall be appointed in accordance with the
_Public Service Employment Act_.

Idem

(2) The officers and employees referred to in subsection (1) shall be deemed
to be employed in the public service for the purposes of the _Public Service
Superannuation Act_.

Technical assistance

(3) The Board may engage on a temporary basis the services of persons having
technical or specialized knowledge to advise and assist in the performance of
its duties and the Board may, in accordance with Treasury Board directives,
fix and pay the remuneration and expenses of those persons.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 12; 2003, c. 22, s. 225(E).

Concluding matters after membership expires

**66.5 ** (1) A member of the Board whose term expires may conclude the
matters that the member has begun to consider.

Decisions

(2) Matters before the Board shall be decided by a majority of the members of
the Board and the presiding member shall have a second vote in the case of a
tie.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 12.

Interim decisions

**66.51 ** The Board may, on application, make an interim decision.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 12.

Variation of decisions

**66.52 ** A decision of the Board respecting royalties or their related terms
and conditions that is made under subsection 68(3), sections 68.1 or 70.15 or
or subsections 70.2(2), 70.6(1), 73(1) or 83(8) may, on application, be varied
by the Board if, in its opinion, there has been a material change in
circumstances since the decision was made.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 12; 1988, c. 65, s. 64; 1997, c. 24, s. 42.

Regulations

**66.6 ** (1) The Board may, with the approval of the Governor in Council,
make regulations governing

(a) the practice and procedure in respect of the Board's hearings, including
the number of members of the Board that constitutes a quorum;

(b) the time and manner in which applications and notices must be made or
given;

(c) the establishment of forms for the making or giving of applications and
notices; and

(d) the carrying out of the work of the Board, the management of its internal
affairs and the duties of its officers and employees.

Publication of proposed regulations

(2) A copy of each regulation that the Board proposes to make under subsection
(1) shall be published in the _Canada Gazette_ at least sixty days before the
proposed effective date thereof and a reasonable opportunity shall be given to
interested persons to make representations with respect thereto.

Exception

(3) No proposed regulation that has been published pursuant to subsection (2)
need again be published under that subsection, whether or not it has been
altered as a result of representations made with respect thereto.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 12.

General powers, etc.

**66.7 ** (1) The Board has, with respect to the attendance, swearing and
examination of witnesses, the production and inspection of documents, the
enforcement of its decisions and other matters necessary or proper for the due
exercise of its jurisdiction, all such powers, rights and privileges as are
vested in a superior court of record.

Enforcement of decisions

(2) Any decision of the Board may, for the purposes of its enforcement, be
made an order of the Federal Court or of any superior court and is enforceable
in the same manner as an order thereof.

Procedure

(3) To make a decision of the Board an order of a court, the usual practice
and procedure of the court in such matters may be followed or a certified copy
of the decision may be filed with the registrar of the court and thereupon the
decision becomes an order of the court.

Effect of variation of decision

(4) Where a decision of the Board that has been made an order of a court is
varied by a subsequent decision of the Board, the order of the court shall be
deemed to have been varied accordingly and the subsequent decision may, in the
same manner, be made an order of the court.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 12; 2002, c. 8, s. 131(F).

Distribution, publication of notices

**66.71 ** Independently of any other provision of this Act relating to the
distribution or publication of information or documents by the Board, the
Board may at any time cause to be distributed or published, in any manner and
on any terms and conditions that it sees fit, any notice that it sees fit to
be distributed or published.

1997, c. 24, s. 43.

Studies

**66.8 ** The Board shall conduct such studies with respect to the exercise of
its powers as are requested by the Minister.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 12.

Report

**66.9 ** (1) The Board shall, not later than August 31 in each year, submit
to the Governor in Council through the Minister an annual report on the
Board's activities for the preceding year describing briefly the applications
made to the Board, the Board's decisions and any other matter that the Board
considers relevant.

Tabling

(2) The Minister shall cause a copy of each annual report to be laid before
each House of Parliament on any of the first fifteen days on which that House
is sitting after the Minister receives the report.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 12.

Regulations

**66.91 ** The Governor in Council may make regulations issuing policy
directions to the Board and establishing general criteria to be applied by the
Board or to which the Board must have regard

(a) in establishing fair and equitable royalties to be paid pursuant to this
Act; and

(b) in rendering its decisions in any matter within its jurisdiction.

1997, c. 24, s. 44.

## Collective Administration of Performing Rights and of Communication Rights

Public access to repertoires

**67. ** Each collective society that carries on

(a) the business of granting licences or collecting royalties for the
performance in public of musical works, dramatico-musical works, performer's
performances of such works, or sound recordings embodying such works, or

(b) the business of granting licences or collecting royalties for the
communication to the public by telecommunication of musical works, dramatico-
musical works, performer's performances of such works, or sound recordings
embodying such works, other than the communication of musical works or
dramatico-musical works in a manner described in subsection 31(2),

must answer within a reasonable time all reasonable requests from the public
for information about its repertoire of works, performer's performances or
sound recordings, that are in current use.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 67; R.S., 1985, c. 10 (1st Supp.), s. 1, c. 10 (4th
Supp.), s. 12; 1993, c. 23, s. 3; 1997, c. 24, s. 45.

Filing of proposed tariffs

**67.1 ** (1) Each collective society referred to in section 67 shall, on or
before the March 31 immediately before the date when its last tariff approved
pursuant to subsection 68(3) expires, file with the Board a proposed tariff,
in both official languages, of all royalties to be collected by the collective
society.

Where no previous tariff

(2) A collective society referred to in subsection (1) in respect of which no
tariff has been approved pursuant to subsection 68(3) shall file with the
Board its proposed tariff, in both official languages, of all royalties to be
collected by it, on or before the March 31 immediately before its proposed
effective date.

Effective period of tariffs

(3) A proposed tariff must provide that the royalties are to be effective for
periods of one or more calendar years.

Prohibition of enforcement

(4) If a proposed tariff is not filed with respect to the work, performer's
performance or sound recording in question, no action may be commenced,
without the written consent of the Minister, for

(a) the infringement of the rights, referred to in section 3, to perform a
work in public or to communicate it to the public by telecommunication; or

(b) the infringement of the rights referred to in paragraph 15(1.1)(d) or
18(1.1)(a); or

(c) the recovery of royalties referred to in section 19.

Publication of proposed tariffs

(5) As soon as practicable after the receipt of a proposed tariff filed
pursuant to subsection (1), the Board shall publish it in the _Canada Gazette_
and shall give notice that, within sixty days after the publication of the
tariff, prospective users or their representatives may file written objections
to the tariff with the Board.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 12; 1997, c. 24, s. 45; 2001, c. 34, s.
35(E).

**67.2 and 67.3 ** [Repealed, 1997, c. 24, s. 45]

Board to consider proposed tariffs and objections

**68. ** (1) The Board shall, as soon as practicable, consider a proposed
tariff and any objections thereto referred to in subsection 67.1(5) or raised
by the Board, and

(a) send to the collective society concerned a copy of the objections so as to
permit it to reply; and

(b) send to the persons who filed the objections a copy of any reply thereto.

Criteria and factors

(2) In examining a proposed tariff for the performance in public or the
communication to the public by telecommunication of performer's performances
of musical works, or of sound recordings embodying such performer's
performances, the Board

(a) shall ensure that

(i) the tariff applies in respect of performer's performances and sound
recordings only in the situations referred to in the provisions of section 20
other than subsections 20(3) and (4),

(ii) the tariff does not, because of linguistic and content requirements of
Canada's broadcasting policy set out in section 3 of the _Broadcasting Act_,
place some users that are subject to that Act at a greater financial
disadvantage than others, and

(iii) the payment of royalties by users pursuant to section 19 will be made in
a single payment; and

(b) may take into account any factor that it considers appropriate.

Certification

(3) The Board shall certify the tariffs as approved, with such alterations to
the royalties and to the terms and conditions related thereto as the Board
considers necessary, having regard to

(a) any objections to the tariffs under subsection 67.1(5); and

(b) the matters referred to in subsection (2).

Publication of approved tariffs

(4) The Board shall

(a) publish the approved tariffs in the _Canada Gazette_ as soon as
practicable; and

(b) send a copy of each approved tariff, together with the reasons for the
Board's decision, to each collective society that filed a proposed tariff and
to any person who filed an objection.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 68; R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 13; 1993, c. 23,
s. 5; 1997, c. 24, s. 45.

Special and transitional royalty rates

**68.1 ** (1) Notwithstanding the tariffs approved by the Board under
subsection 68(3) for the performance in public or the communication to the
public by telecommunication of performer's performances of musical works, or
of sound recordings embodying such performer's performances,

(a) wireless transmission systems, except community systems and public
transmission systems, shall pay royalties as follows:

(i) in respect of each year, $100 on the first 1.25 million dollars of annual
advertising revenues, and

(ii) on any portion of annual advertising revenues exceeding 1.25 million
dollars,

(A) for the first year following the coming into force of this section,
thirty-three and one third per cent of the royalties set out in the approved
tariff for that year,

(B) for the second year following the coming into force of this section,
sixty-six and two thirds per cent of the royalties set out in the approved
tariff for that year, and

(C) for the third year following the coming into force of this section, one
hundred per cent of the royalties set out in the approved tariff for that
year;

(b) community systems shall pay royalties of $100 in respect of each year; and

(c) public transmission systems shall pay royalties, in respect of each of the
first three years following the coming into force of this section, as follows:

(i) for the first year following the coming into force of this section,
thirty-three and one third per cent of the royalties set out in the approved
tariff for that year,

(ii) for the second year following the coming into force of this section,
sixty-six and two thirds per cent of the royalties set out in the approved
tariff for that year, and

(iii) for the third year following the coming into force of this section, one
hundred per cent of the royalties set out in the approved tariff for that
year.

Effect of paying royalties

(2) The payment of the royalties set out in subsection (1) fully discharges
all liabilities of the system in question in respect of the approved tariffs.

Definition of "advertising revenues"

(3) The Board may, by regulation, define "advertising revenues" for the
purposes of subsection (1).

Preferential royalty rates

(4) The Board shall, in certifying a tariff as approved under subsection
68(3), ensure that there is a preferential royalty rate for small cable
transmission systems.

Regulations

(5) The Governor in Council may make regulations defining "small cable
transmission system", "community system", "public transmission system" and
"wireless transmission system" for the purposes of this section.

1997, c. 24, s. 45.

Effect of fixing royalties

**68.2 ** (1) Without prejudice to any other remedies available to it, a
collective society may, for the period specified in its approved tariff,
collect the royalties specified in the tariff and, in default of their
payment, recover them in a court of competent jurisdiction.

Proceedings barred if royalties tendered or paid

(2) No proceedings may be brought against a person who has paid or offered to
pay the royalties specified in an approved tariff for

(a) the infringement of the right to perform in public or the right to
communicate to the public by telecommunication, referred to in section 3;

(b) the infringement of the rights referred to in paragraph 15(1.1)(d) or
18(1.1)(a); or

(c) the recovery of royalties referred to in section 19.

Continuation of rights

(3) Where a collective society files a proposed tariff in accordance with
subsection 67.1(1),

(a) any person entitled to perform in public or communicate to the public by
telecommunication those works, performer's performances or sound recordings
pursuant to the previous tariff may do so, even though the royalties set out
therein have ceased to be in effect, and

(b) the collective society may collect the royalties in accordance with the
previous tariff,

until the proposed tariff is approved.

1997, c. 24, s. 45.

## Public Performances in Places Other Than Theatres

**69. ** (1) [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 14]

Radio performances in places other than theatres

(2) In respect of public performances by means of any radio receiving set in
any place other than a theatre that is ordinarily and regularly used for
entertainments to which an admission charge is made, no royalties shall be
collectable from the owner or user of the radio receiving set, but the Board
shall, in so far as possible, provide for the collection in advance from radio
broadcasting stations of royalties appropriate to the conditions produced by
the provisions of this subsection and shall fix the amount of the same.

Expenses to be taken into account

(3) In fixing royalties pursuant to subsection (2), the Board shall take into
account all expenses of collection and other outlays, if any, saved or savable
by, for or on behalf of the owner of the copyright or performing right
concerned or his agents, in consequence of subsection (2).

(4) [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 14]

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 69; R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 14; 1993, c. 44,
s. 73; 1997, c. 24, s. 52(F).

**70. ** [Repealed, R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 15]

## Collective Administration in Relation to Rights under Sections 3, 15, 18
and 21

### Collective Societies

Collective societies

**70.1 ** Sections 70.11 to 70.6 apply in respect of a collective society that
operates

(a) a licensing scheme, applicable in relation to a repertoire of works of
more than one author, pursuant to which the society sets out the classes of
uses for which and the royalties and terms and conditions on which it agrees
to authorize the doing of an act mentioned in section 3 in respect of those
works;

(a.1) a licensing scheme, applicable in relation to a repertoire of
performer's performances of more than one performer, pursuant to which the
society sets out the classes of uses for which and the royalties and terms and
conditions on which it agrees to authorize the doing of an act mentioned in
section 15 in respect of those performer's performances;

(b) a licensing scheme, applicable in relation to a repertoire of sound
recordings of more than one maker, pursuant to which the society sets out the
classes of uses for which and the royalties and terms and conditions on which
it agrees to authorize the doing of an act mentioned in section 18 in respect
of those sound recordings; or

(c) a licensing scheme, applicable in relation to a repertoire of
communication signals of more than one broadcaster, pursuant to which the
society sets out the classes of uses for which and the royalties and terms and
conditions on which it agrees to authorize the doing of an act mentioned in
section 21 in respect of those communication signals.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 16; 1997, c. 24, s. 46.

Public information

**70.11 ** A collective society referred to in section 70.1 must answer within
a reasonable time all reasonable requests from the public for information
about its repertoire of works, performer's performances, sound recordings or
communication signals.

1997, c. 24, s. 46.

Tariff or agreement

**70.12 ** A collective society may, for the purpose of setting out by licence
the royalties and terms and conditions relating to classes of uses,

(a) file a proposed tariff with the Board; or

(b) enter into agreements with users.

1997, c. 24, s. 46.

### Tariffs

Filing of proposed tariffs

**70.13 ** (1) Each collective society referred to in section 70.1 may, on or
before the March 31 immediately before the date when its last tariff approved
pursuant to subsection 70.15(1) expires, file with the Board a proposed
tariff, in both official languages, of royalties to be collected by the
collective society for issuing licences.

Where no previous tariff

(2) A collective society referred to in subsection (1) in respect of which no
tariff has been approved pursuant to subsection 70.15(1) shall file with the
Board its proposed tariff, in both official languages, of all royalties to be
collected by it for issuing licences, on or before the March 31 immediately
before its proposed effective date.

1997, c. 24, s. 46.

Application of certain provisions

**70.14 ** Where a proposed tariff is filed under section 70.13, subsections
67.1(3) and (5) and subsection 68(1) apply, with such modifications as the
circumstances require.

1997, c. 24, s. 46.

Certification

**70.15 ** (1) The Board shall certify the tariffs as approved, with such
alterations to the royalties and to the terms and conditions related thereto
as the Board considers necessary, having regard to any objections to the
tariffs.

Application of certain provisions

(2) Where a tariff is approved under subsection (1), subsections 68(4) and
68.2(1) apply, with such modifications as the circumstances require.

1997, c. 24, s. 46.

Distribution, publication of notices

**70.16 ** Independently of any other provision of this Act relating to the
distribution or publication of information or documents by the Board, the
Board shall notify persons affected by a proposed tariff, by

(a) distributing or publishing a notice, or

(b) directing another person or body to distribute or publish a notice,

in such manner and on such terms and conditions as the Board sees fit.

1997, c. 24, s. 46.

Prohibition of enforcement

**70.17 ** Subject to section 70.19, no proceedings may be brought for the
infringement of a right referred to in section 3, 15, 18 or 21 against a
person who has paid or offered to pay the royalties specified in an approved
tariff.

1997, c. 24, s. 46.

Continuation of rights

**70.18 ** Subject to section 70.19, where a collective society files a
proposed tariff in accordance with section 70.13,

(a) any person authorized by the collective society to do an act referred to
in section 3, 15, 18 or 21, as the case may be, pursuant to the previous
tariff may do so, even though the royalties set out therein have ceased to be
in effect, and

(b) the collective society may collect the royalties in accordance with the
previous tariff,

until the proposed tariff is approved.

1997, c. 24, s. 46.

Where agreement exists

**70.19 ** If there is an agreement mentioned in paragraph 70.12(b), sections
70.17 and 70.18 do not apply in respect of the matters covered by the
agreement.

1997, c. 24, s. 46.

Agreement

**70.191 ** An approved tariff does not apply where there is an agreement
between a collective society and a person authorized to do an act mentioned in
section 3, 15, 18 or 21, as the case may be, if the agreement is in effect
during the period covered by the approved tariff.

1997, c. 24, s. 46.

### Fixing of Royalties in Individual Cases

Application to fix amount of royalty, etc.

**70.2 ** (1) Where a collective society and any person not otherwise
authorized to do an act mentioned in section 3, 15, 18 or 21, as the case may
be, in respect of the works, sound recordings or communication signals
included in the collective society's repertoire are unable to agree on the
royalties to be paid for the right to do the act or on their related terms and
conditions, either of them or a representative of either may, after giving
notice to the other, apply to the Board to fix the royalties and their related
terms and conditions.

Fixing royalties, etc.

(2) The Board may fix the royalties and their related terms and conditions in
respect of a licence during such period of not less than one year as the Board
may specify and, as soon as practicable after rendering its decision, the
Board shall send a copy thereof, together with the reasons therefor, to the
collective society and the person concerned or that person's representative.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 16; 1997, c. 24, s. 46.

Agreement

**70.3 ** (1) The Board shall not proceed with an application under section
70.2 where a notice is filed with the Board that an agreement touching the
matters in issue has been reached.

Idem

(2) An agreement referred to in subsection (1) is effective during the year
following the expiration of the previous agreement, if any, or of the last
period specified under subsection 70.2(2).

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 16.

Effect of Board decision

**70.4 ** Where any royalties are fixed for a period pursuant to subsection
70.2(2), the person concerned may, during the period, subject to the related
terms and conditions fixed by the Board and to the terms and conditions set
out in the scheme and on paying or offering to pay the royalties, do the act
with respect to which the royalties and their related terms and conditions are
fixed and the collective society may, without prejudice to any other remedies
available to it, collect the royalties or, in default of their payment,
recover them in a court of competent jurisdiction.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 16; 1997, c. 24, s. 47.

### Examination of Agreements

Definition of "Commissioner"

**70.5 ** (1) For the purposes of this section and section 70.6,
"Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Competition appointed under the
_Competition Act_.

Filing agreement with the Board

(2) Where a collective society concludes an agreement to grant a licence
authorizing a person to do an act mentioned in section 3, 15, 18 or 21, as the
case may be, the collective society or the person may file a copy of the
agreement with the Board within fifteen days after it is concluded.

Idem

(3) Section 45 of the _Competition Act_ does not apply in respect of any
royalties or related terms and conditions arising under an agreement filed in
accordance with subsection (2).

Access by Commissioner

(4) The Commissioner may have access to the copy of an agreement filed in
accordance with subsection (2).

Request for examination

(5) Where the Commissioner considers that an agreement filed in accordance
with subsection (2) is contrary to the public interest, the Commissioner may,
after advising the parties concerned, request the Board to examine the
agreement.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 16; 1997, c. 24, s. 48; 1999, c. 2, ss. 45,
46.

Examination and fixing of royalty

**70.6 ** (1) The Board shall, as soon as practicable, consider a request by
the Commissioner to examine an agreement and the Board may, after giving the
Commissioner and the parties concerned an opportunity to present their
arguments, alter the royalties and any related terms and conditions arising
under the agreement, in which case section 70.4 applies with such
modifications as the circumstances require.

Idem

(2) As soon as practicable after rendering its decision, the Board shall send
a copy thereof, together with the reasons therefor, to the parties concerned
and to the Commissioner.

R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), s. 16; 1997, c. 24, s. 49(F); 1999, c. 2, s.
46.

**70.61 to 70.8 ** [Repealed, 1997, c. 24, s. 50]

## Royalties in Particular Cases

Filing of proposed tariffs

**71. ** (1) Each collective society that carries on the business of
collecting royalties referred to in subsection 29.6(2), 29.7(2) or (3) or
paragraph 31(2)(d) shall file with the Board a proposed tariff, but no other
person may file such a tariff.

Times for filing

(2) A proposed tariff must be

(a) in both official languages; and

(b) filed on or before the March 31 immediately before the date that the
approved tariff ceases to be effective.

Where no previous tariff

(3) A collective society in respect of which no proposed tariff has been
certified pursuant to paragraph 73(1)(d) shall file its proposed tariff on or
before the March 31 immediately before its proposed effective date.

Effective period of tariffs

(4) A proposed tariff must provide that the royalties are to be effective for
periods of one or more calendar years.

R.S., 1985, c. C-42, s. 71; 1997, c. 24, s. 50.

Publication of proposed tariffs

**72. ** (1) As soon as practicable after the receipt of a proposed tariff
filed pursuant to section 71, the Board shall publish it in the _Canada
Gazette_ and shall give notice that, within sixty days after the publication
of the tariff, educational institutions or prospective retransmitters within
the meaning of subsection 31(1), or their representatives, may file written
objections to the tariff with the Board.

Board to consider proposed tariffs and objections

(2) The Board shall, as soon as practicable, consider a proposed tariff and
any objections thereto referred to in subsection (1) or raised by the Board,
and

(a) send to the collective society concerned a copy of the objections so as to
permit it to reply; and

(b) send to the persons who filed the objections a copy of any reply thereto.

1997, c. 24, s. 50; 1999, c. 31, s. 61; 2002, c. 26, s. 3.

Certification

**73. ** (1) On the conclusion of its consideration of proposed tariffs, the
Board shall

(a) establish

(i) a manner of determining the royalties to be paid by educational
institutions and by retransmitters within the meaning of subsection 31(1), and

(ii) such terms and conditions related to those royalties as the Board
considers appropriate;

(b) determine the portion of the royalties referred to in paragraph (a) that
is to be paid to each collective society;

(c) vary the tariffs accordingly; and

(d) certify the tariffs as the approved tariffs, whereupon the tariffs become
for the purposes of this Act the approved tariffs.

No discrimination

(2) For greater certainty, the Board, in establishing a manner of determining
royalties under paragraph (1)(a) or in apportioning them under paragraph
(1)(b), may not discriminate between owners of copyright on the ground of
their nationality or residence.

Publication of approved tariffs

(3) The Board shall publish the approved tariffs in the _Canada Gazette_ as
soon as practicable and send a copy of each approved tariff, together with the
reasons for the Board's decision, to each collective society that filed a
proposed tariff and to any person who filed an objection.

1997, c. 24, s. 50; 1999, c. 31, s. 62; 2002, c. 26, s. 4.

Special case

**74. ** (1) The Board shall, in establishing a manner of determining
royalties under paragraph 73(1)(a), ensure that there is a preferential rate
for small retransmission systems.

Regulations

(2) The Governor in Council may make regulations defining "small
retransmission systems" for the purpose of subsection (1).

1997, c. 24, s. 50.

Effect of fixing royalties

**75. ** Without prejudice to any other remedies available to it, a collective
society may, for the period specified in its approved tariff, collect the
royalties specified in the tariff and, in default of their payment, recover
them in a court of competent jurisdiction.

1997, c. 24, s. 50.

Claims by non-members

**76. ** (1) An owner of copyright who does not authorize a collective society
to collect, for that person's benefit, royalties referred to in paragraph
31(2)(d) is, if the work is communicated to the public by telecommunication
during a period when an approved tariff that is applicable to that kind of
work is effective, entitled to be paid those royalties by the collective
society that is designated by the Board, of its own motion or on application,
subject to the same conditions as those to which a person who has so
authorized that collective society is subject.

Royalties that may be recovered

(2) An owner of copyright who does not authorize a collective society to
collect, for that person's benefit, royalties referred to in subsection
29.7(2) or (3) is, if such royalties are payable during a period
when an approved tariff that is applicable to that kind of work or other
subject-matter is effective, entitled to be paid those royalties by the
collective society that is designated by the Board, of its own motion or on
application, subject to the same conditions as those to which a person who has
so authorized that collective society is subject.

Exclusion of remedies

(3) The entitlement referred to in subsections (1) and (2) is the only remedy
of the owner of the copyright for the payment of royalties for the
communication, making of the copy or sound recording or performance in public,
as the case may be.

Regulations

(4) The Board may, for the purposes of this section,

(a) require a collective society to file with the Board information relating
to payments of royalties collected by it to the persons who have authorized it
to collect those royalties; and

(b) by regulation, establish periods of not less than twelve months within
which the entitlements referred to in subsections (1) and (2) must be
exercised, in the case of royalties referred to in

(i) [Repealed, 2010, c. 32, s. 56]

(ii) [Repealed, 2010, c. 32, s. 56]

(iii) subsection 29.7(2), beginning on the making of the copy,

(iv) subsection 29.7(3), beginning on the performance in public, or

(v) paragraph 31(2)(d), beginning on the communication to the public by
telecommunication.

1997, c. 24, s. 50.

## Owners Who Cannot be Located

Circumstances in which licence may be issued by Board

**77. ** (1) Where, on application to the Board by a person who wishes to
obtain a licence to use

(a) a published work,

(b) a fixation of a performer's performance,

(c) a published sound recording, or

(d) a fixation of a communication signal

in which copyright subsists, the Board is satisfied that the applicant has
made reasonable efforts to locate the owner of the copyright and that the
owner cannot be located, the Board may issue to the applicant a licence to do
an act mentioned in section 3, 15, 18 or 21, as the case may be.

Conditions of licence

(2) A licence issued under subsection (1) is non-exclusive and is subject to
such terms and conditions as the Board may establish.

Payment to owner

(3) The owner of a copyright may, not later than five years after the
expiration of a licence issued pursuant to subsection (1) in respect of the
copyright, collect the royalties fixed in the licence or, in default of their
payment, commence an action to recover them in a court of competent
jurisdiction.

Regulations

(4) The Copyright Board may make regulations governing the issuance of
licences under subsection (1).

1997, c. 24, s. 50.

## Compensation for Acts Done Before Recognition of Copyright or Moral Rights

Board may determine compensation

**78. ** (1) Subject to subsection (2), for the purposes of subsections
32.4(2), 32.5(2) and 33(2), 33.1(2) and 33.2(2) the Board may, on
application by any of the parties referred to in one of those provisions,
determine the amount of the compensation referred to in that provision that the
Board considers reasonable, having regard to all the circumstances, including
any judgment of a court in an action between the parties for the enforcement of
a right mentioned in subsection 32.4(3) or 32.5(3).

Limitation

(2) The Board shall not

(a) proceed with an application under subsection (1) where a notice is filed
with the Board that an agreement regarding the matters in issue has been
reached; or

(b) where a court action between the parties for enforcement of a right
referred to in subsection 32.4(3) or 32.5(3), as the case may be, has been
commenced, continue with an application under subsection (1) until the court
action is finally concluded.

Interim orders

(3) Where the Board proceeds with an application under subsection (1), it may,
for the purpose of avoiding serious prejudice to any party, make an interim
order requiring a party to refrain from doing any act described in the order
until the determination of compensation is made under subsection (1).

1997, c. 24, s. 50.

# PART VIII

# PRIVATE COPYING

## Interpretation

Definitions

**79. ** In this Part,


"audio recording medium"

"audio recording medium" means a recording medium, regardless of its material
form, onto which a sound recording may be reproduced and that is of a kind
ordinarily used by individual consumers for that purpose, excluding any
prescribed kind of recording medium;


"blank audio recording medium"

"blank audio recording medium" means

(a) an audio recording medium onto which no sounds have ever been fixed, and

(b) any other prescribed audio recording medium;


"collecting body"

"collecting body" means the collective society, or other society, association
or corporation, that is designated as the collecting body under subsection
83(8);


"eligible author"

"eligible author" means an author of a musical work, whether created before or
after the coming into force of this Part, that is embodied in a sound
recording, whether made before or after the coming into force of this Part, if
copyright subsists in Canada in that musical work;


"eligible maker"

"eligible maker" means a maker of a sound recording that embodies a musical
work, whether the first fixation of the sound recording occurred before or
after the coming into force of this Part, if

(a) both the following two conditions are met:

(i) the maker, at the date of that first fixation, if a corporation, had its
headquarters in Canada or, if a natural person, was a Canadian citizen or
permanent resident within the meaning of subsection 2(1) of the _Immigration
and Refugee Protection Act_, and

(ii) copyright subsists in Canada in the sound recording, or

(b) the maker, at the date of that first fixation, if a corporation, had its
headquarters in a country referred to in a statement published under section
85 or, if a natural person, was a citizen, subject or permanent resident of
such a country;


"eligible performer"

"eligible performer" means the performer of a performer's performance of a
musical work, whether it took place before or after the coming into force of
this Part, if the performer's performance is embodied in a sound recording and

(a) both the following two conditions are met:

(i) the performer was, at the date of the first fixation of the sound
recording, a Canadian citizen or permanent resident within the meaning of
subsection 2(1) of the _Immigration and Refugee Protection Act_, and

(ii) copyright subsists in Canada in the performer's performance, or

(b) the performer was, at the date of the first fixation of the sound
recording, a citizen, subject or permanent resident of a country referred to
in a statement published under section 85;


"prescribed"

"prescribed" means prescribed by regulations made under this Part.

1997, c. 24, s. 50; 2001, c. 27, s. 240.

## Copying for Private Use

Where no infringement of copyright

**80. ** (1) Subject to subsection (2), the act of reproducing all or any
substantial part of

(a) a musical work embodied in a sound recording,

(b) a performer's performance of a musical work embodied in a sound recording,
or

(c) a sound recording in which a musical work, or a performer's performance of
a musical work, is embodied

onto an audio recording medium for the private use of the person who makes the
copy does not constitute an infringement of the copyright in the musical work,
the performer's performance or the sound recording.

Limitation

(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if the act described in that subsection is
done for the purpose of doing any of the following in relation to any of the
things referred to in paragraphs (1)(a) to (c):

(a) selling or renting out, or by way of trade exposing or offering for sale
or rental;

(b) distributing, whether or not for the purpose of trade;

(c) communicating to the public by telecommunication; or

(d) performing, or causing to be performed, in public.

1997, c. 24, s. 50.

## Right of Remuneration

Right of remuneration

**81. ** (1) Subject to and in accordance with this Part, eligible authors,
eligible performers and eligible makers have a right to receive remuneration
from manufacturers and importers of blank audio recording media in respect of
the reproduction for private use of

(a) a musical work embodied in a sound recording;

(b) a performer's performance of a musical work embodied in a sound recording;
or

(c) a sound recording in which a musical work, or a performer's performance of
a musical work, is embodied.

Assignment of rights

(2) Subsections 13(4) to (7) apply, with such modifications as the
circumstances require, in respect of the rights conferred by subsection (1) on
eligible authors, performers and makers.

1997, c. 24, s. 50.

## Levy on Blank Audio Recording Media

Liability to pay levy

**82. ** (1) Every person who, for the purpose of trade, manufactures a blank
audio recording medium in Canada or imports a blank audio recording medium
into Canada

(a) is liable, subject to subsection (2) and section 86, to pay a levy to the
collecting body on selling or otherwise disposing of those blank audio
recording media in Canada; and

(b) shall, in accordance with subsection 83(8), keep statements of account of
the activities referred to in paragraph (a), as well as of exports of those
blank audio recording media, and shall furnish those statements to the
collecting body.

No levy for exports

(2) No levy is payable where it is a term of the sale or other disposition of
the blank audio recording medium that the medium is to be exported from
Canada, and it is exported from Canada.

1997, c. 24, s. 50.

Filing of proposed tariffs

**83. ** (1) Subject to subsection (14), each collective society may file with
the Board a proposed tariff for the benefit of those eligible authors,
eligible performers and eligible makers who, by assignment, grant of licence,
appointment of the society as their agent or otherwise, authorize it to act on
their behalf for that purpose, but no person other than a collective society
may file any such tariff.

Collecting body

(2) Without limiting the generality of what may be included in a proposed
tariff, the tariff may include a suggestion as to whom the Board should
designate under paragraph (8)(d) as the collecting body.

Times for filing

(3) Proposed tariffs must be in both official languages and must be filed on
or before the March 31 immediately before the date when the approved tariffs
cease to be effective.

Where no previous tariff

(4) A collective society in respect of which no proposed tariff has been
certified pursuant to paragraph (8)(c) shall file its proposed tariff on or
before the March 31 immediately before its proposed effective date.

Effective period of levies

(5) A proposed tariff must provide that the levies are to be effective for
periods of one or more calendar years.

Publication of proposed tariffs

(6) As soon as practicable after the receipt of a proposed tariff filed
pursuant to subsection (1), the Board shall publish it in the _Canada Gazette_
and shall give notice that, within sixty days after the publication of the
tariff, any person may file written objections to the tariff with the Board.

Board to consider proposed tariffs and objections

(7) The Board shall, as soon as practicable, consider a proposed tariff and
any objections thereto referred to in subsection (6) or raised by the Board,
and

(a) send to the collective society concerned a copy of the objections so as to
permit it to reply; and

(b) send to the persons who filed the objections a copy of any reply thereto.

Duties of Board

(8) On the conclusion of its consideration of the proposed tariff, the Board
shall

(a) establish, in accordance with subsection (9),

(i) the manner of determining the levies, and

(ii) such terms and conditions related to those levies as the Board considers
appropriate, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the
form, content and frequency of the statements of account mentioned in
subsection 82(1), measures for the protection of confidential information
contained in those statements, and the times at which the levies are payable,

(b) vary the tariff accordingly,

(c) certify the tariff as the approved tariff, whereupon that tariff becomes
for the purposes of this Part the approved tariff, and

(d) designate as the collecting body the collective society or other society,
association or corporation that, in the Board's opinion, will best fulfil the
objects of sections 82, 84 and 86,

but the Board is not obligated to exercise its power under paragraph (d) if it
has previously done so, and a designation under that paragraph remains in
effect until the Board makes another designation, which it may do at any time
whatsoever, on application.

Factors Board to consider

(9) In exercising its power under paragraph (8)(a), the Board shall satisfy
itself that the levies are fair and equitable, having regard to any prescribed
criteria.

Publication of approved tariffs

(10) The Board shall publish the approved tariffs in the _Canada Gazette_ as
soon as practicable and shall send a copy of each approved tariff, together
with the reasons for the Board's decision, to the collecting body, to each
collective society that filed a proposed tariff, and to any person who filed
an objection.

Authors, etc., not represented by collective society

(11) An eligible author, eligible performer or eligible maker who does not
authorize a collective society to file a proposed tariff under subsection (1)
is entitled, in relation to

(a) a musical work,

(b) a performer's performance of a musical work, or

(c) a sound recording in which a musical work, or a performer's performance of
a musical work, is embodied,

as the case may be, to be paid by the collective society that is designated by
the Board, of the Board's own motion or on application, the remuneration
referred to in section 81 if such remuneration is payable during a period when
an approved tariff that is applicable to that kind of work, performer's
performance or sound recording is effective, subject to the same conditions as
those to which a person who has so authorized that collective society is
subject.

Exclusion of other remedies

(12) The entitlement referred to in subsection (11) is the only remedy of the
eligible author, eligible performer or eligible maker referred to in that
subsection in respect of the reproducing of sound recordings for private use.

Powers of Board

(13) The Board may, for the purposes of subsections (11) and (12),

(a) require a collective society to file with the Board information relating
to payments of moneys received by the society pursuant to section 84 to the
persons who have authorized it to file a tariff under subsection (1); and

(b) by regulation, establish the periods, which shall not be less than twelve
months, beginning when the applicable approved tariff ceases to be effective,
within which the entitlement referred to in subsection (11) must be exercised.

Single proposed tariff

(14) Where all the collective societies that intend to file a proposed tariff
authorize a particular person or body to file a single proposed tariff on
their behalf, that person or body may do so, and in that case this section
applies, with such modifications as the circumstances require, in respect of
that proposed tariff.

1997, c. 24, s. 50.

## Distribution of Levies Paid

Distribution by collecting body

**84. ** As soon as practicable after receiving the levies paid to it, the
collecting body shall distribute the levies to the collective societies
representing eligible authors, eligible performers and eligible makers, in the
proportions fixed by the Board.

1997, c. 24, s. 50.

Reciprocity

**85. ** (1) Where the Minister is of the opinion that another country grants
or has undertaken to grant to performers and makers of sound recordings that
are Canadian citizens or permanent residents within the meaning of subsection
2(1) of the _Immigration and Refugee Protection Act_ or, if corporations, have
their headquarters in Canada, as the case may be, whether by treaty,
convention, agreement or law, benefits substantially equivalent to those
conferred by this Part, the Minister may, by a statement published in the
_Canada Gazette_,

(a) grant the benefits conferred by this Part to performers or makers of sound
recordings that are citizens, subjects or permanent residents of or, if
corporations, have their headquarters in that country; and

(b) declare that that country shall, as regards those benefits, be treated as
if it were a country to which this Part extends.

Reciprocity

(2) Where the Minister is of the opinion that another country neither grants
nor has undertaken to grant to performers or makers of sound recordings that
are Canadian citizens or permanent residents within the meaning of subsection
2(1) of the _Immigration and Refugee Protection Act_ or, if corporations, have
their headquarters in Canada, as the case may be, whether by treaty,
convention, agreement or law, benefits substantially equivalent to those
conferred by this Part, the Minister may, by a statement published in the
_Canada Gazette_,

(a) grant the benefits conferred by this Part to performers or makers of sound
recordings that are citizens, subjects or permanent residents of or, if
corporations, have their headquarters in that country, as the case may be, to
the extent that that country grants those benefits to performers or makers of
sound recordings that are Canadian citizens or permanent residents within the
meaning of subsection 2(1) of the _Immigration and Refugee Protection Act_ or,
if corporations, have their headquarters in Canada; and

(b) declare that that country shall, as regards those benefits, be treated as
if it were a country to which this Part extends.

Application of Act

(3) Any provision of this Act that the Minister specifies in a statement
referred to in subsection (1) or (2)

(a) applies in respect of performers or makers of sound recordings covered by
that statement, as if they were citizens of or, if corporations, had their
headquarters in Canada; and

(b) applies in respect of a country covered by that statement, as if that
country were Canada.

Application of Act

(4) Subject to any exceptions that the Minister may specify in a statement
referred to in subsection (1) or (2), the other provisions of this Act also
apply in the way described in subsection (3).

1997, c. 24, s. 50; 2001, c. 27, s. 241.

## Exemption from Levy

Where no levy payable

**86. ** (1) No levy is payable under this Part where the manufacturer or
importer of a blank audio recording medium sells or otherwise disposes of it
to a society, association or corporation that represents persons with a
perceptual disability.

Refunds

(2) Where a society, association or corporation referred to in subsection (1)

(a) purchases a blank audio recording medium in Canada from a person other
than the manufacturer or importer, and

(b) provides the collecting body with proof of that purchase, on or before
June 30 in the calendar year following the calendar year in which the purchase
was made,

the collecting body is liable to pay forthwith to the society, association or
corporation an amount equal to the amount of the levy paid in respect of the
blank audio recording medium purchased.

If registration system exists

(3) If regulations made under paragraph 87(a) provide for the registration of
societies, associations or corporations that represent persons with a
perceptual disability, subsections (1) and (2) shall be read as referring to
societies, associations or corporations that are so registered.

1997, c. 24, s. 50.

## Regulations

Regulations

**87. ** The Governor in Council may make regulations

(a) respecting the exemptions and refunds provided for in section 86,
including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing,

(i) regulations respecting procedures governing those exemptions and refunds,

(ii) regulations respecting applications for those exemptions and refunds, and

(iii) regulations for the registration of societies, associations or
corporations that represent persons with a perceptual disability;

(b) prescribing anything that by this Part is to be prescribed; and

(c) generally for carrying out the purposes and provisions of this Part.

1997, c. 24, s. 50.

## Civil Remedies

Right of recovery

**88. ** (1) Without prejudice to any other remedies available to it, the
collecting body may, for the period specified in an approved tariff, collect
the levies due to it under the tariff and, in default of their payment,
recover them in a court of competent jurisdiction.

Failure to pay royalties

(2) The court may order a person who fails to pay any levy due under this Part
to pay an amount not exceeding five times the amount of the levy to the
collecting body. The collecting body must distribute the payment in the manner
set out in section 84.

Order directing compliance

(3) Where any obligation imposed by this Part is not complied with, the
collecting body may, in addition to any other remedy available, apply to a
court of competent jurisdiction for an order directing compliance with that
obligation.

Factors to consider

(4) Before making an order under subsection (2), the court must take into
account

(a) whether the person who failed to pay the levy acted in good faith or bad
faith;

(b) the conduct of the parties before and during the proceedings; and

(c) the need to deter persons from failing to pay levies.

1997, c. 24, s. 50.

# PART IX

# GENERAL PROVISIONS

No copyright, etc., except by statute

**89. ** No person is entitled to copyright otherwise than under and in
accordance with this Act or any other Act of Parliament, but nothing in this
section shall be construed as abrogating any right or jurisdiction in respect
of a breach of trust or confidence.

1997, c. 24, s. 50.

Interpretation

**90. ** No provision of this Act relating to

(a) copyright in performer's performances, sound recordings or communication
signals, or

(b) the right of performers or makers to remuneration

shall be construed as prejudicing any rights conferred by Part I or, in and of
itself, as prejudicing the amount of royalties that the Board may fix in
respect of those rights.

1997, c. 24, s. 50.

Adherence to Berne and Rome Conventions

**91. ** The Governor in Council shall take such measures as are necessary to
secure the adherence of Canada to

(a) the Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works concluded
at Berne on September 9, 1886, as revised by the Paris Act of 1971; and

(b) the International Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers
of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organisations, done at Rome on October 26,
1961.

1997, c. 24, s. 50.

Review of Act

**92. ** Five years after the day on which this section comes into force and at
the end of each subsequent period of five years, a committee of the Senate, of
the House of Commons or of both Houses of Parliament is to be designated or
established for the purpose of reviewing this Act.

SCHEDULE I

(Section 60)

EXISTING RIGHTS


Column I

Column II

Existing Right

Substituted Right


Works other than Dramatic and Musical Works

Copyright

Copyright as defined by this Act[1][4].

   [4]: #dfn_Ind1939_hq_8946

Musical and Dramatic Works

Both copyright and performing right

Copyright as defined by this Act.

Copyright, but not performing right

Copyright as defined by this Act, except the sole right to perform the work or
any substantial part thereof in public.

Performing right, but not copyright

The sole right to perform the work in public, but none of the other rights
comprised in copyright as defined by this Act.


1 In the case of an essay, article or portion forming part of and first
published in a review, magazine or other periodical or work of a like nature,
the right shall be subject to any right of publishing the essay, article or
portion in a separate form to which the author is entitled on January 1, 1924
or would if this Act had not been passed have become entitled under section 18
of _An Act to amend the Law of Copyright_, being chapter 45 of the Statutes of
the United Kingdom, 1842.

For the purposes of this Schedule the following expressions, where used in
column I thereof, have the following meanings:

"Copyright" in the case of a work that according to the law in force
immediately before January 1, 1924 has not been published before that date and
statutory copyright wherein depends on publication, includes the right at
common law, if any, to restrain publication or other dealing with the work;

"Performing right", in the case of a work that has not been performed in
public before January 1, 1924, includes the right at common law, if any, to
restrain the performance thereof in public.

R.S., c. C-30, Sch. I; 1976-77, c. 28, s. 10.

SCHEDULE II

[Repealed, 1993, c. 44, s. 74]

SCHEDULE III

[Repealed, 1997, c. 24, s. 51]

RELATED PROVISIONS


-- R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), ss. 23 to 27:

Application re moral rights

**23. ** (1) The rights referred to in section 14.1 of the _Copyright Act_, as
enacted by section 4, subsist in respect of a work even if the work was
created before the coming into force of section 4.

Restriction

(2) A remedy referred to in subsection 34(1.1) of the _Copyright Act_, as
enacted by section 8, may only be obtained where the infringement of the moral
rights of the author occurs after the coming into force of section 8.

Idem

(3) Notwithstanding subsection (1) and the repeal by section 3 of subsection
14(4) of the _Copyright Act_, the rights referred to in section 14.1 of that
Act, as enacted by section 4, are not enforceable against

(a) a person who, on the coming into force of this section, is the owner of
the copyright in, or holds a licence in relation to, a work, or

(b) a person authorized by a person described in paragraph (a) to do an act
mentioned in section 3 of that Act,

in respect of any thing done during the period for which the person described
in paragraph (a) is the owner or for which the licence is in force, and the
rights referred to in subsection 14(4) of that Act continue to be enforceable
against a person described in paragraph (a) or (b) during that period as if
subsection 14(4) of that Act were not repealed.

-- R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), ss. 23 to 27:

Application re computer programs

**24. ** Subsection 1(2), the definition "computer program" in subsection 1(3)
and section 5 apply in respect of a computer program that was made prior to
the day on which those provisions come into force but where, by virtue only of
subsections 1(2) and (3) and this section, copyright subsists in a computer
program that was made prior to May 27, 1987, nothing done in respect of the
computer program before May 27, 1987 shall be construed to constitute an
infringement of the copyright.

-- R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), ss. 23 to 27:

Making of records, perforated rolls, etc.

**25. ** It shall be deemed not to be an infringement of copyright in any
musical, literary or dramatic work for any person to make within Canada during
the six months following the coming into force of section 7 records,
perforated rolls or other contrivances by means of which sounds may be
reproduced and by means of which the work may be mechanically performed, if
the person proves

(a) that before the coming into force of section 7, the person made such
contrivances in respect of that work in accordance with section 29 or 30 of
the _Copyright Act_ and any regulation made under section 33 of that Act, as
they read immediately before the coming into force of section 7; and

(b) that the making would, had it occurred before the coming into force of
section 7, have been deemed not to have been an infringement of copyright by
section 29 or 30 of the _Copyright Act_, as it read immediately before the
coming into force of section 7.

-- R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), ss. 23 to 27:

Infringements before coming into force

**26. ** Subsection 64(1) and section 64.1 of the _Copyright Act_, as enacted
by section 11, apply in respect of any alleged infringement of copyright
occurring prior to, on or after the day on which section 11 comes into force.

-- R.S., 1985, c. 10 (4th Supp.), ss. 23 to 27:

Continuation in office

**27. ** Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the members of the
Copyright Appeal Board appointed pursuant to section 68 of the _Copyright
Act_, as it read immediately before the coming into force of section 13,
continue in office and may continue to perform their duties and exercise their
powers to the extent necessary to consider and deal with any matter before it
pursuant to section 69 of that Act before the coming into force of section 14.

-- 1988, c. 65, s. 149:

First certified statements of royalties

**149. ** For greater certainty, the royalties in the first statements
certified under paragraph 70.63(1)(d) of the _Copyright Act_ become effective
on January 1, 1990 regardless of when the statements are so certified.

-- 1993, c. 23, ss. 6, 7:

Transitional: Statements of royalties

**6. ** (1) Notwithstanding section 67 of the _Copyright Act_, a statement
filed with the Copyright Board pursuant to subsection 67(2) or (3) of that Act
on or before September 1, 1992

(a) may provide, or

(b) may be amended with leave of the Board, if application therefor is made to
the Board within twenty-eight days after the coming into force of this Act, to
provide

 for the payment of royalties, for the period beginning on the coming into
force of this Act and ending at the end of 1993, in respect of the
communication of dramatico-musical or musical works to the public by
telecommunication, and a statement so filed or amended is effective for that
period to the extent that the Board certifies it as approved pursuant to
subsection 67.2(1) of the _Copyright Act_.

No duplication of royalties

(2) Where a statement referred to in subsection (1) is certified as approved,
the Board shall not certify as approved any other statement filed by the same
applicant, to the extent that it provides for royalties in respect of the same
act and for the same period as set out in the statement previously certified
as approved.

-- 1993, c. 23, ss. 6, 7:

Where this Act does not apply

**7. ** This Act does not apply in respect of statements filed with the Board
pursuant to subsection 67(2) or (3) of the _Copyright Act_ on or before
September 1, 1991 that relate to any year before 1993.

-- 1993, c. 44, ss. 60(2), (3):


Application of amendments to s. 10

(2) Subject to subsection 75(2) of this Act, section 10 of the _Copyright
Act_, as enacted by subsection (1) of this section, applies to all
photographs, whether made before or after the coming into force of this
section.

-- 1993, c. 44, ss. 60(2), (3):


Application of amendments to s. 11

(3) Except as provided by section 75 of this Act,

(a) section 11 of the _Copyright Act_, as enacted by subsection (1) of this
section, applies only in respect of contrivances made after the coming into
force of this section; and

(b) section 11 of the _Copyright Act_, as it read immediately before the
coming into force of this section, continues to apply in respect of
contrivances made before the coming into force of this section.

-- 1993, c. 44, ss. 75 to 77:

Application of certain amendments

**75. ** (1) Subject to subsection (2), amendments to the _Copyright Act_ made
by this Act relating to the term of copyright apply in respect of all works,
whether made before or after the coming into force of this section.

Idem

(2) Where the term of the copyright in a work expires before the coming into
force of this section, nothing in this Act shall be construed as extending or
reviving that term.

-- 1993, c. 44, ss. 75 to 77:

Cinematographs

**76. ** (1) Except as provided by subsection (2) of this section, the
_Copyright Act_, as amended by this Act, applies in respect of all
cinematographs, whether made before or after the coming into force of this
section, subject to subsection 75(2) of this Act.

Idem

(2) Section 10 of the _Copyright Act_, as that section read immediately before
the coming into force of this section and in so far as it governs who is the
author of a photograph, continues to apply in respect of all cinematographs
made before the coming into force of this section that were, before the coming
into force of this section, protected as photographs.

-- 1993, c. 44, ss. 75 to 77:

Application of section 5

**77. ** Nothing in section 5 of the _Copyright Act_, as amended by this Act,
confers copyright on works made before the coming into force of this section
that did not qualify for copyright under section 5 of the _Copyright Act_ as
it read immediately before the coming into force of this section.

-- 1997, c. 24, s. 18(2):


(2) Section 30 of the Act, as enacted by subsection (1) of this section, does
not apply in respect of collections referred to in section 30 that are
published before the coming into force of section 30. Such collections
continue to be governed by paragraph 27(2)(d) of the Act as it read before the
coming into force of section 15 of this Act.

-- 1997, c. 24, ss. 20(3), (4):


(3) Section 38.1 of the _Copyright Act_, as enacted by subsection (1) of this
section, only applies

(a) to proceedings commenced after the date of the coming into force of that
subsection; and

(b) where the infringement to which those proceedings relate occurred after
that date.

-- 1997, c. 24, ss. 20(3), (4):


(4) Section 39.1 of the _Copyright Act_, as enacted by subsection (1) of this
section, applies in respect of

(a) proceedings commenced but not concluded before the coming into force of
subsection (1) of this section; and

(b) proceedings commenced after the coming into force of subsection (1) of
this section.

-- 1997, c. 24, s. 22(2):


(2) Subsection (1) applies in respect of

(a) proceedings commenced but not concluded before this section comes into
force; and

(b) proceedings commenced after this section comes into force.

-- 1997, c. 24, ss. 53 to 58.1:

**53. ** The levies in the first tariffs certified under paragraph 83(8)(c) of
the _Copyright Act_, as enacted by section 50 of this Act, become effective at
the beginning of the first calendar year following the coming into force of
that paragraph, regardless of when the tariffs are so certified, and are
effective for a period of two calendar years.

-- 1997, c. 24, ss. 53 to 58.1:

**53.1 ** Notwithstanding subsection 67.1(2) and section 70.13 of the
_Copyright Act_, as enacted by sections 45 and 46 of this Act, the date for
the filing of the first proposed tariffs under those sections shall be on or
before September 1 of the year of the coming into force of this section.

-- 1997, c. 24, ss. 53 to 58.1:

**54. ** For greater certainty, all notices published under subsection 5(2) of
the _Copyright Act_ before the coming into force of this section are deemed to
have been validly made and to have had force and effect in accordance with
their terms.

-- 1997, c. 24, ss. 53 to 58.1:

**54.1 ** Section 6 of the _Copyright Act_ applies to a photograph in which
copyright subsists on the date of the coming into force of this section, if
the author is

(a) a natural person who is the author of the photograph referred to in
subsection 10(2) of the _Copyright Act_, as enacted by section 7 of this Act;
or

(b) the natural person referred to in subsection 10(1.1) of the _Copyright
Act_, as enacted by section 7 of this Act.

-- 1997, c. 24, ss. 53 to 58.1:

**55. ** (1) Part II of the _Copyright Act_, as enacted by section 14 of this
Act, shall be construed as a replacement for subsections 5(3) to (6) and
section 11 of the _Copyright Act_ as those provisions read immediately before
the coming into force of subsection 5(3) and section 8, respectively, of this
Act.

(2) The rights conferred by Part II of the _Copyright Act_, as enacted by
section 14 of this Act, shall not be construed as diminishing the rights
conferred by subsections 5(3) to (6) and section 11 of the _Copyright Act_ as
those provisions read immediately before the coming into force of subsection
5(3) and section 8, respectively, of this Act, in relation to records,
perforated rolls and other contrivances by means of which sounds may be
mechanically reproduced that were made before the coming into force of
subsection 5(3) and section 8, respectively, of this Act.

(3) Where an assignment of copyright or a grant of any interest therein

(a) was made before the coming into force of Part II of the _Copyright Act_,
as enacted by section 14 of this Act, and

(b) was made by the maker of a sound recording who was a natural person,

subsections 14(1) and (2) of the _Copyright Act_ continue to apply in respect
of that assignment or grant, with such modifications as the circumstances
require, as if the sound recording was the work referred to in those
subsections and the maker of the sound recording was its author.

-- 1997, c. 24, ss. 53 to 58.1:

**56. ** Nothing in this Act shall be construed as diminishing the right
conferred by section 14.01 of the _Copyright Act_ as that section read
immediately before the coming into force of section 12 of this Act.

-- 1997, c. 24, ss. 53 to 58.1:

**57. ** For greater certainty, the amendments to the _Copyright Act_ that
eliminate references to "British subject" and "Her Majesty's Realms and
Territories" do not affect any copyright or moral rights that subsisted in
Canada immediately before the coming into force of those amendments.

-- 1997, c. 24, ss. 53 to 58.1:

**58. ** Nothing in this Act shall be construed as reviving a copyright that
expired before the coming into force of this section.

-- 1997, c. 24, ss. 53 to 58.1:

**58.1 ** No agreement concluded before April 25, 1996 that assigns a right or
grants an interest by licence in a right that would be a copyright or a right
to remuneration under this Act shall be construed as assigning or granting any
rights conferred for the first time by this Act, unless the agreement
specifically provides for the assignment or grant.

-- 1997, c. 24, ss. 62, 63:

Coming into force

**62. ** (1) The following provisions come into force or are deemed to have
come into force on June 30, 1996:

(a) the definitions "exclusive distributor", "educational institution" and
"library, archive or museum" in section 2 of the _Copyright Act_, as enacted
by subsection 1(5) of this Act;

(b) section 2.6 of the _Copyright Act_, as enacted by section 2 of this Act;

(c) section 27.1 of the _Copyright Act_, as enacted by section 15 of this Act;
and

(d) section 45 of the _Copyright Act_, as enacted by section 28 of this Act.

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the definition "exclusive distributor"
referred to in paragraph (1)(a) shall be read as follows during the period
beginning on June 30, 1996 and ending on the day that is sixty days after the
day on which this Act is assented to:

"exclusive distributor"

"exclusive distributor" means, in relation to a book, a person who has, before
or after the coming into force of this definition, been appointed in writing,
by the owner or exclusive licensee of the copyright in the book in Canada, as

(a) the only distributor of the book in Canada or any part of Canada, or

(b) the only distributor of the book in Canada or any part of Canada in
respect of a particular sector of the market.

(3) Notwithstanding paragraph (1)(d), paragraph 45(1)(e) of the _Copyright
Act_, as enacted by section 28 of this Act, shall be read as follows for the
period beginning on June 30, 1996 and ending on the day that is sixty days
after the day on which this Act is assented to:

(e) to import copies, made with the consent of the owner of the copyright in
the country where they were made, of any used books.

-- 1997, c. 24, ss. 62, 63:

**63. ** (1) No exclusive distributor, within the meaning assigned to that
expression by subsection 62(2) of this Act, copyright owner or exclusive
licensee is entitled to a remedy referred to in the _Copyright Act_ in
relation to an infringement referred to in subsection 27.1(1) or (2) of that
Act, as enacted by section 15 of this Act, during the period beginning on June
30, 1996 and ending on the day on which this Act is assented to, unless

(a) before the infringement occurred, notice in writing has been given to the
person referred to in subsection 27.1(1) or (2) of that Act, as enacted by
section 15 of this Act, as the case may be, that

(i) there is an exclusive distributor of the book in Canada, and

(ii) section 27.1 of that Act came into force or was deemed to have come into
force on June 30, 1996; and

(b)  in the case of an infringement referred to in section 27.1 of that Act,
as enacted by section 15 of this Act, the remedy is only in relation to a book
that was imported during that period and forms part of the inventory of the
person referred to in section 27.1 of that Act on the day on which this Act is
assented to.

(2) No exclusive distributor, copyright owner or exclusive licensee is
entitled to a remedy referred to in subsection (1) against an educational
institution, library, archive or museum.

(3) For greater certainty, the expiration of the period referred to in
subsection 62(2) of this Act does not affect the right of an exclusive
distributor to continue, after the expiration of that period, legal
proceedings validly commenced during that period.

-- 2004, c. 11, s. 21(4):

Application

**21. ** (4) Subsection (1) applies in respect of unpublished works deposited
in an archive on or before September 1, 1999 or at any time after that date.


AMENDMENTS NOT IN FORCE

--1997, c. 24, s. 20(2):

(2) Section 38 of the _Copyright Act_, as it read immediately before the
coming into force of subsection (1) of this section, continues to apply in
respect of proceedings commenced but not concluded before the coming into
force of subsection (1) of this section.
